  The tradition of Chinese ethical thought is centrally concerned with  questions about how one ought to live: what goes into a worthwhile  life, how to weigh duties toward family versus duties toward  strangers, whether human nature is predisposed to be morally good or  bad, how one ought to relate to the non-human world, the extent to  which one ought to become involved in reforming the larger social and political structures of one's society, and how one ought to conduct  oneself when in a position of influence or power. The personal,  social, and political are often intertwined in Chinese approaches to  the subject. Anyone who wants to draw from the range of important  traditions of thought on this subject needs to look seriously at the  Chinese tradition. The canonical texts of that tradition have been  memorized by schoolchildren in Asian societies for hundreds of years, and at the same time have served as objects of sophisticated and  rigorous analysis by scholars and theoreticians rooted in widely  variant traditions and approaches. This article will introduce  ethical issues raised by some of the most influential texts in  Confucianism, Mohism, Daoism, Legalism, and Chinese Buddhism.   In the Analects 13.18, the Governor of She tells Confucius  of a Straight Body who reported his father to the authorities for  stealing a sheep. Confucius (Kongzi, best known in the West under his latinized name, lived in the 6th and 5th  century B.C.E) replies that in his village, uprightness lies in  fathers and sons covering up for each other. In the  Euthyphro, Socrates encounters Euthyphro (whose name can be  translated as “Straight thinker”), reputed for his  religious knowledge and on his way to bring charges against his  father for murder. The conversation between Socrates and Euthyphro  leads to a theoretical inquiry in which various proposed answers as  to piety's ousia (essence) are probed and ultimately found  unsatisfactory, but in which no answer to the piety or impiety of  Euthyphro's action is given. The contrast between these two stories  highlights one of the distinctive features of Chinese ethics in  general: its respect for the practical problem. The practical problem discussed by Confucius and Socrates is arguably a universal one: the  conflict between loyalty owed to a family member and duty to uphold  public justice within the larger community. Confucius's response is  one dimension of a characteristically Chinese respect for the  practical problem. The nature of the problem demands a practical  response. However, another dimension of a reflective respect for the practical problem is to maintain a certain humility in the  face of a really hard problem. It is to be skeptical that highly  abstract theories will provide a response that is true to the  complexities of that problem. A tradition exemplifying such respect  will contain influential works that will not pretend to have resolved recurring tensions within the moral life such as those identified in  the Analects and the Euthyphro.   Confucius gives an immediate practical answer in 13.18, but the  reader and commentators have been left to weave together the various  remarks about filial piety so as to present a rationale for that  answer. These remarks quite often concern rather particular matters,  as is the matter of turning in one's father for stealing a sheep, and the implications for more general issues are ambiguous. Do fathers  and sons cover up for each other on all occasions, no matter how  serious, and if there is a cover-up, is there also an attempt to  compensate the victim of the wrongdoing? The particularity of these  passages is tied up with the emphasis on praxis. What is sought and  what is discussed is often the answer to a particular practical  problem, and the resulting particularity of the remarks invites  multiple interpretations. The sayings often are presented as emerging from conversations between Confucius and his students or various  personages with official positions, or among Confucius's students.  One passage (11.22) portrays Confucius as having tailored his advice  according to the character of the particular student: he urges one  student to ask father and elder brother for advice before practicing  something he has learnt, while he urges the other to immediately  practice; the reason is that the first has so much energy that he  needs to be kept back, while the second is retiring and needs to be  urged forward. With this passage in mind, we might then wonder  whether the apparent tension between remarks made in connection with  a concept is to be understood in terms of the differences between the individuals addressed or the context of the conversation.   All texts that have become canonical within a tradition, of course,  are subject to multiple interpretations, but Chinese texts invite  them. They invite them by articulating themes that stay relatively  close to the pre-theoretical experience that gives rise to the  practical problems of moral life (see Kupperman, 1999 on the role of  experience in Chinese philosophy). The pre-theoretical is not  experience that is a pure given or unconceptualized, nor is it  necessarily experience that is universal in its significance and  intelligibility across different traditions of thought and culture.  This attention to pre-theoretical experience also leads to  differences in format and discursive form: dialogues and stories are  more suited for appealing to and evoking the kind of pre-theoretical  experience that inspires parts of the text. By contrast, much Western philosophy has gone with Plato in taking the route of increasing  abstraction from pre-theoretical experience.   The contrast is not meant to imply that Chinese philosophy fails to  give rise to theoretical reflection. Theoretical reflection of great  significance arises in the Mozi, Mencius,  Hanfeizi, Xunzi, and Zhuangzi, but there  is more frequent interplay between the theorizing and references to  pre-theoretical experience. In Chinese texts there are suggestions  for theorizing about this experience, but the suggestions often  indicate several different and fruitful directions for theorizing to  go further. These directions may seem incompatible, and they may or  may not be so in the end, but the tensions between these directions  are real. The result is a fruitful ambiguity that poses a  problematic. Pre-theoretical experience poses a practical  problem. Apparently incompatible solutions to problems are partially  theorized in the text, but the apparent incompatibility is not  removed. Much of the value of these texts lies in their leaving the  tensions in place with enough theory given to stimulate thinking  within a certain broadly defined approach. There is more than enough  for the sophisticated theorist to try to interpret or to reconstruct  a more defined position as an extension of that broadly defined  approach. At the same time, the problematic is partly framed with the language of pre-theoretical experience in the form of dialogue and  story, making the texts accessible to a much broader range of readers than is usually the case with philosophy texts. The following  sections present some of the major kinds of problematic that appear  in the major schools of Chinese ethical thought.   Confucian ethics is focused around ideals of character and the  constituting traits or virtues. The most frequently discussed ideal  is that of the junzi. The Chinese word originally meant  “prince's son,” but in the Analects it refers to ethical nobility. The first English translations rendered it as “gentleman,” but Ames and Rosemont (1998) have usefully suggested “exemplary person.” Among the traits connected to ethical nobility are filial piety, a respect for and dedication to the performance of traditional ritual forms of conduct, and the ability to judge what the right thing to do is in the given situation. These traits are virtues in the sense that they are necessary for following the dao, the way human beings ought to live their lives. As Yu (2007) points out, the dao plays the kind of role in ancient Chinese ethics that is analogous to the role played by eudaimonia or flourishing, in ancient Greek ethics. The  junzi is the ethical exemplar with the virtues making it  possible to follow the dao.   Besides the concepts of dao and junzi, the concept of ren is a unifying theme in the Analects. Before Confucius's time, the concept of ren referred to the aristocracy of bloodlines, meaning something like the strong and handsome appearance of an aristocrat. But in the Analects the concept is of a moral excellence that anyone has the potential to achieve. Various translations have been given of ren. Many translations attempt to convey the idea of complete ethical virtue, connoting a comprehensive state of ethical excellence. In a number of places in the Analects the ren person is treated as equivalent to the junzi, indicating that ren has the meaning of complete or comprehensive moral excellence, lacking no particular virtue but having them all. However, ren in some places in the Analects is treated as one virtue among others such as wisdom and courage. In the narrower sense of being one virtue among others, it is explained in 12.22 in terms of caring for others. It is in light of these passages that other translators, such as D.C. Lau, use ‘benevolence’ to translate ren. However, others have tried to more explicitly convey the sense of ‘ren’ in the comprehensive sense of all-encompassing moral virtue through use of the translation ‘Good’ or ‘Goodness’ (see Waley, 1938, 1989; Slingerland, 2003). It is possible that the sense of ren as particular virtue and the sense of comprehensive excellence are related in that attitudes such as care and respect for others may be a pervasive aspect of different forms of moral excellence, e.g., such attitudes may be expressed in ritual performance, as discussed below, or in right or appropriate action according to the context. But this suggestion is speculative, and because the very nature of ren remains so elusive, it shall be here referred to simply as‘ren’.   Why is the central virtue discussed in such an elusive fashion in the Analects?  The answer may lie in the role that pre-theoretical experience plays in Chinese philosophy.  Tan (2005) has pointed to the number and vividness of the persons in the Analects who serve as moral exemplars.  She suggests that the text invites us to exercise our imaginations in envisioning what these people might have been like and what we ourselves might become in trying to emulate them.  Use of the imagination, she points out, draws our attention to the particularities of virtue and engages our emotions and desires.  Amy Olberding (2008, 2012) develops the notion of exemplarism into a Confucian epistemology, according to which we get much of our important knowledge by encountering the relevant objects or persons.  Upon initial contact, we may have little general knowledge of the qualities that make them so compelling to us, but we are motivated to further investigate. Confucius treated as exemplars legendary figures from the early days of the Zhou dynasty, such as the Duke of Zhou and Kings Wu and Wen.  Confucius served as an exemplar to his students, perhaps of the virtue of ren, though he never claimed the virtue for himself.  Book Ten of the Analects displays what might appear to be an obsessive concern with the way Confucius greeted persons in everyday life, e.g., if he saw they were dressed in mourning dress, he would take on a solemn appearance or lean forward on the stanchion of his carriage.  Such concern becomes much more comprehensible if Confucius is being treated as an exemplar of virtue from which the students are trying to learn. The focus of Book Ten and elsewhere in the Analects also suggests that the primary locus of virtue is to be found in how people treat each other in the fabric of everyday life and not in the dramatic moral dilemmas so much discussed in contemporary Western moral philosophy.   Analects 1.15 likens the project of cultivating one's  character to crafting something fine from raw material: cutting bone, carving a piece of horn, polishing or grinding a piece of jade. The  chapter also stresses the importance of li (the rites,  ritual) in this project. In the Analects ritual includes  ceremonies of ancestor worship, the burial of parents, and the rules  governing respectful and appropriate behavior between parents and  children. Later the word came to cover a broad range of customs and  practices that spelled out courteous and respectful behavior of many  different kinds. Engaging in ritual, learning to perform it properly  and with the right attitudes of respect while performing it, is to  engage in a kind of cutting and carving and polishing and grinding of the self. One of the most distinctive marks of Confucian ethics is  the centrality of ritual performance in the ethical cultivation of  character. For example, while Aristotelian habituation generally  corresponds to the Confucian cultivation of character, there is no comparable emphasis in Aristotle on the role of ritual  performance in this process of character transformation. Yet  Confucians will say that any complete description of self-cultivation must include a role for the culturally established customs that spell out what it means to express respect for another person in various  social contexts. Just how that role is conceived in the  Analects is one of the central interpretive puzzles  concerning the Analects. The interpretive question of  how li is central to self-cultivation is posed in  particular about its relation to the chief virtue of ren.   In the Analects 3.3 the Master said, “A man who is not ren—what has he to do with ritual?” The  implication is that ritual is a means of cultivating and expressing a ren that is already there, at least in a raw or unrefined  state. This implication about the role of ritual is  consistent with passages of the Analects in which Confucius  shows flexibility on the question of whether to follow established  ritual practice. 9.3 shows him accepting the contemporary practice of wearing a cheaper silk ceremonial cap rather than the traditional  linen cap. 9.3 also shows Confucius rejecting the contemporary  practice of bowing after one ascends the stairs leading up to the  ruler's dais, and maintaining the traditional practice of bowing  before one ascends the stairs. The implication is that the  contemporary practice expresses the wrong attitude toward the  ruler—presumptuousness in assuming permission to ascend. 9.3  suggests that it is something like the right attitude that is  cultivated and expressed by ritual. Kwong-loi Shun (1993) has called  this kind of understanding of ritual the “instrumental”  interpretation.   However, in other places of the Analects, ritual seems to take on a more central role in the achievement of ren. Indeed, it seems to be presented as the key. A very common translation of 12.1 has Confucius telling his favorite student Yan Hui that “Restraining yourself and returning to the rites constitutes ren. If for one day you managed to restrain yourself and return to the rites, in this way you could lead the entire world back to ren. The key to achieving ren lies within yourself—how could it come from others?” (translation from Slingerland, 2003, though see Li, 2007, for a different translation of the word wei usually translated as ‘constitutes’, with different implications for the question of the relation between li and ren). Such passages have given rise to the “definitionalist” interpretation, as Shun calls it, which makes li definitive of the whole of ren. Obviously the instrumental and definitional interpretations cannot both be true.   Some have argued that such serious conflicts within the text constitute reasons for thinking that the Analects is an accretive text, i.e., composed of layers added at different times by different people with conflicting views.  To some extent, viewing the Analects as accretive is nothing new, but Bruce and A. Takeo Brooks (1998, 2000) recently have taken that view very far by identifying Book 4 (and only part of it, for that matter) as the most reflective of the historical Kongzi's views, and the other books as stemming from Confucius's students and members of his family. The different books, and, sometimes, individual passages within the books, represent different time periods, people, with different agendas who are responding to different conditions, and often putting forward incompatible strands of Confucianism. The Brooks suggest that the parts of the Analects most directly associated with the historical Confucius and his disciples are the parts that feature ren as the pre-eminent virtue and that de-emphasize the role of ritual. The parts that are due to another trend in Confucianism, headed by Confucius's descendants, are the parts that elevate ritual as the key to ren. The Brooks's theory of the Analects has drawn appreciation and disagreement (e.g., see Slingerland, 2000 for both). It threatens to dislodge the assumption that underlies the dominant mode of interpreting the Analects, which is that the text, or most of it, reflects the coherent thought of one person.   One response to this interpretive challenge is to acknowledge the real possibility that different sets of passages are the products of different thinkers, but also to hold that these different people, even if they have different pragmatic and political agendas (a factor that the Brooks tend to emphasize), might also have had different and philosophically substantial perspectives on common problems. One of those problems might indeed have been the relation between ren and li, and at least part of the explanation of why different  and potentially conflicting things are said about that relation is  that the relation is a difficult one to figure out and that different thinkers addressing that common problem might reasonably have arrived at different things to say. Whether these different things are  ultimately irreconcilable remains an open question. One might take a  constructive attitude to these differences, ask what good  philosophical reasons could motivate the different approaches, and  ask whether there is a way of reconciling what all the good reasons  entail. Kwong-loi Shun's approach exemplifies such a reconciling strategy. He holds that on the one hand, a particular set of ritual forms are the conventions that a community has evolved, and without such forms attitudes such as respect or reverence cannot be made intelligible or expressed (the truth behind the definitionalist interpretation). In this sense, li constitutes ren within or for a given community. On the other hand, different communities may have different conventions that express respect or reverence, and moreover any given community may revise its conventions in piecemeal though not wholesale fashion (the truth behind the instrumentalist interpretation).   Chenyang Li (2007) proposes a different approach based on a different reading of the word ‘wei’ used in 12.1 and often translated as ‘constitutes’ to render the crucial line, “Restraining yourself and returning to the rites constitutes ren.” Li notes that a common meaning of the word is ‘make’ or ‘result in.’ The relation between li and ren need not be construed as either definitional or constitutive, nor need it be construed as purely instrumental.  Li proposes that li functions something like a cultural grammar where ren is like mastery of the culture. Mastery of a language entails mastery of its grammar but not vice versa.  Both Shun and Li are striving to capture a way in which ren does not reduce to li but also a way in which li is more than purely instrumental to the realization of ren.  There are good philosophical reasons for this move. Consider the reasons for resisting the reduction of ren to li. As indicated above, 9.3 suggests that  the attitudes of respect and reverence that are expressed by ritual  forms are not reducible to any particular set of such forms, and Shun has a point in arguing that such attitudes could be expressed by  different sets of such forms as established by different communities. In studying the cultures of other communities, we recognize that  certain customs are meant to signify respect, even if we do not share these customs, just as we recognize that something that does not  signify disrespect in our culture does indeed so signify in another  culture. The fact that we can distinguish the attitude from the  ritual forms that we use to express them allows us to consider  alternative ritual forms that could express the same attitude.  Ceremonial caps that are made of more economical material are  acceptable, perhaps, because wearing such caps rather than the  material ones need not affect the spirit of the ceremony. By  contrast, bowing after one ascends the stairs constitutes an  unacceptable change in attitude. To maintain that particular ritual  forms do not define the respect and reverence they are  intended to express is not to underestimate their importance for  cultivating and strengthening these attitudes. Acting in ways that  express respect given the conventionally established meanings of  accepted ritual forms helps to strengthen the agent's disposition to  have respect. The ethical development of character does involve  strengthening some emotional dispositions over others. We strengthen  dispositions by acting on them. By providing conventionally  established, symbolic ways to express respect for others, ritual  forms give participants ways to act on and therefore to strengthen  the right dispositions.   On the other hand, there is good reason to resist the reduction of  li simply to the role of expressing and cultivating a set of attitudes and emotional dispositions. In his influential  interpretation (1972) of the Analects, Herbert Fingarette  construes ritual performance as an end in itself, as beautiful and  dignified, open and shared participation in ceremonies that celebrate human community. Ritual performance, internalized so that it becomes  second nature, such that it is gracefully and spontaneously  performed, is a crucial constituent of a fully realized human life.  There are nonconventional dimensions of what it is to show respect,  such as providing food for one's parents (see Analects 2.7), but the particular way the agent does this will be deeply influenced  by custom. Indeed, custom specifies what is a respectful way of  serving food. On the Confucian view, doing so in a graceful and  whole-hearted fashion as spelled out by the customs of one's  community is part of what it is to live a fully human life.   Ritual constitutes an important part of what ren is, and hence  it is not merely an instrument for refining the substance of  ren. At the same time it is not the whole of ren. Consider  that part of ren that involves attitudinal dispositions.  Attitude is not reducible to ritual form even if acting on that form  can cultivate and sustain attitude. Moreover, 7.30 emphasizes the  connection between desire for ren and its achievement (“If I simply desire ren, I find that it is already there”).  The achievement of ren is of course a difficult and long  journey, and so 7.30 implies that coming to truly desire it lies at  the heart of that achievement. The multifaceted nature of ren  emerges in Book 12, where Confucius is portrayed as giving different  descriptions of ren. In 12.1, as already noted, he says that  ritual makes for ren. But then in 12.2, he says that ren  involves comporting oneself in public as if one were receiving an  important guest and in the management of the common people behaving  as if one were overseeing a great sacrifice (the duty to be  respectful toward others). 12.2 also associates ren with  shu or “sympathetic understanding,” not imposing on others what you yourself do not desire. Here the emphasis is not so much on ritual or not exclusively anyway, but on the attitudes one displays toward others, and on the ability to understand what others want or do not want based on projecting oneself into their situation. In 12.3, when asked about ren, Confucius says that ren people are hesitant to speak (suggesting that such people take extreme care not to have their words exceed their actions). And then in 12.22, when asked about ren, Confucius says that it is to care for people. Such diverse characterizations are appropriate if ren is complete ethical virtue or comprehensive excellence that includes many dimensions, including but not reducing to the kinds of excellence associated with li.   If we take the relevant passages on li and ren as forming a whole in which a coherent view is embedded, there is a pretty good case for regarding the observance of ritual propriety as a constituent of ren as well as crucial for instrumentally realizing some other dimensions of ren. But it does not exhaust the substance of ren.  If the text is as radically accretive as the Brooks maintain, then the proposed construal of the relation is more of a reconstruction of what the best philosophical position might be on the nature of the relation. The reconstructive possibility should not be disturbing as long as we recognize it for what it is. Thinkers within a complex and vigorous tradition frequently re-interpret, expand, develop, revise, and even reject some of what one has inherited from the past. The fact that the Analects itself might be a product of this kind of  engagement might usefully be taken as encouragement for its present  students to engage with the text in the same way.   The Confucian position on the importance of li in ethical  cultivation is interesting and distinctive in its own right, and this is partly because Confucianism hews close to a kind of  pre-theoretical experience of the moral life that might otherwise get obscured by a more purely theoretical approach to ethics. If we look  at everyday experience of the moral life, we see that much of the  substance of ethically significant attitudes such as respect is in  fact given by cultural norms and practices, and learning a morality  must involve learning these norms and practices. Children learn what  their behavior means to others, and what it should mean, by learning  how to greet each other, make requests, and answer requests, all in a respectful manner. Much of our everyday experience of moral  socialization lies in the absorption of or teaching to others of  customs that are conventionally established to mean respect,  gratitude, and other ethically significant attitudes. So construed,  Confucian ethics provides an alternative to understanding the nature  of the moral life that is different from an understanding that is  primarily based on abstract principles, even abstract principles that require respect for each person. This is why there is significant  resonance between Confucianism and communitarian philosophies such as those defended by Alasdair MacIntyre (1984, 1989) and Michael Walzer  (1983). One of the distinctive marks of communitarianism is the theme that much of the substance of a morality is given not in abstract  principles of the sort typically defended in modern Western  philosophy but in a society's specific customs and practices. In the  Analects, the ambiguous relation between ren and  li poses the problematic of how we are to understand the  relation between cultural norms and practices on the one hand and  that part of morality that appears to transcend any particular set of norms and practices. The Analects suggests a large role for  culture, but on the reading suggested here, not a definitional role.  There is much room for theoretical elaboration on the nature of that  role.   Furthermore, in understanding why Confucians take a life of ritual practice to be partly constitutive of a fully human life, one must understand the aesthetic dimension of their notion of a fully human life. Such a life is lived as a beautiful and graceful coordinated interaction with others according to conventionally established forms that express mutual respect. A good of the value attached to the fully human life lies in the aesthetic dimensions of a “dance” (Ihara, 2004) one performs with others. To better understand why the moral and the aesthetic cannot be cleanly separated in Confucian ethics, consider that a graceful and whole-hearted expression of respect can be beautiful precisely because it reflects the extent that the agent has made this moral attitude part of her second nature. The beauty has a moral dimension. Both these themes—the importance of contextualized moral judgment and aesthetic value of human interaction according to custom and tradition—offer opportunities for practitioners of, say, Anglo-American moral philosophy to reflect on what their approaches to the moral life might miss.   Consider ren in its meaning as the particular virtue of caring for others and li in its aspect as the valued human dance. These values are the basis for characterizing Confucian ethics as a relational ethic, meaning that it is in part distinguished by its placement of relationships at the center of a well-lived life (see Ames, 2011).  Confucian ethics are often taken to stand in contrast to ethics that place individual autonomy and freedom to choose how to live. While there is much that is true about this contrast, it must be carefully described so as to differentiate it from some other contrasts. For example, the value of individual autonomy usually includes several different dimensions that do not necessarily accompany one another: (1) prioritizing of individual interests over group or collective interests when these conflict; (2) giving moral permission to the individual to choose from a significantly wide range (within certain moral boundaries) of ways to live; and (3) emphasizing the importance of living according to one's own understanding of what is right and good even if others do not see it the same way.   Confucian ethics in significant part, though not in all parts, accepts autonomy in the sense of (3) (see Shun, 2004; and Brindley, 2010). Confucius is often depicted in the Analects as emphasizing the importance of cultivating one's own character even when others do not recognize or appreciate one's efforts (e.g., 4.14) and of acting independently of what is conventionally approved or disapproved (e.g., 5.1). The texts associated with Mencius (Mengzi, best known in the West under his Latinized name, lived in the 4th century B.C.E.) and Xunzi (4th and 3rd centuries B.C.E.), the most pivotal thinkers in the classical Confucian tradition after Confucius, both articulate the necessity to speak up when one believes the ruler one is serving is on a wrong course of action (e.g., Mencius 1A3 and Xunzi 29.2). On the other hand, none of these classical thinkers argue for the necessity of protecting a frank subordinate from a ruler who is made angry by criticism, and it could be argued that Confucianism does not fully endorse autonomy in sense (3) without endorsing such protection for those who wish to engage in moral criticism of the powerful.   Most interpretations present Confucian ethics as rejecting (2). There is a way for human beings to live, a comprehensive human good to be  realized, and there can be no choosing between significantly  different ways of life that are equally acceptable from a moral  perspective (an important exception to this kind of interpretation is provided by Hall and Ames, 1987, who interpret Confucius's  dao as a human invention, collective and individual). On the other hand, Confucian ethics de-emphasizes legal coercion as a method for guiding people along the way and instead an puts the emphasis on  moral exhortation and inspiration by way of example (see, most  famously, 2.3 of the Analects, which emphasizes the  necessity of a ruler's guiding his people by instilling in them a sense  of shame rather than by the threat of external punishment). While a  Confucian might believe in a single correct way for human beings, she might endorse a significant degree of latitude for people to learn  from their own mistakes and by way of example from others (see Chan,  1999).   Confucian ethics does not accept (1), but not because it subordinates individual interests to group or collective interests (for criticism  of the rather common interpretation of Confucianism as prioritizing  the group over the individual, see Hall and Ames 1998). Rather, there is a different conception of the relationship between individual and  group interests. The best illustration of this different conception  is a story to be found in the Mencius that concerns  sage-king Shun. When Shun wanted to marry, he knew that his father,  influenced by his stepmother, would not allow him to marry. In this  difficult situation, Shun decided to marry without telling his  father, even though he is renowned for his filial piety. Mencius in  fact defends the filiality of Shun's act in 5A2. He observes that  Shun knew that he would not have been allowed to marry if he told his father. This would have resulted in bitterness toward his parents,  and that is why he did not tell them. The implication of this version of Shun's reason is that filiality means preserving an emotionally  viable relationship with one's parents, and in the case at hand Shun  judged that it would have been worse for the relationship to have  asked permission to marry. The conception of the relation between  individual and group interests embodied in this story is not one of  subordination of one to the other but about the mutual dependence  between the individual and the group. The individual depends on the  group and must make the group's interests part of his or her own  interests, but, on the other side of the equation, the group depends  on the individual and must make that individual's interests part of  the group's interests. Shun's welfare depends on his family and  therefore must make his family's interests part of his own (he  resolves to do what is necessary to preserve his relationship to his  parents), but his family's welfare depends on Shun, and therefore it  must recognize his interests to constitute part of its welfare (the  family must recognize that it is damaging itself in requiring Shun to deny himself the most part important of human relationships).   The ways in which Confucianism values autonomy and the ways in which it does not has implications for the increasingly discussed issue as to whether contemporary Confucianism can recognize individual rights. Given the way that individual and group interest are conceived as mutually dependent and interwoven, Confucianism cannot recognize rights that are based on the idea that rights defend the interests of the individual against group interests (though something like this conception of rights might be compatible with Confucianism in case relationships irretrievably break down and individuals need to be protected; see Chan, 1999). The way that Confucianism values living according to one's understanding of the right and the good does provide a basis for the idea that individuals should receive protection when they express their convictions about these matters, particularly when they are expressing convictions about the wrongful or misconceived conduct of their political leaders (Wong, 2004). Furthermore, Chinese thinkers from the 19th century onwards have adapted the concept of rights received in interaction with the West, and these adaptations often articulate the idea that the individual ought to have a range of freedom of expression and action so that they can contribute more richly and originally to the welfare of Chinese society. Chinese thinkers such as Liang Qichao and Japanese thinkers such as Kato affirmed both the legitimacy of the individual's desires and the necessity to harmonize individual and group desires (see Angle and Svensson, 2001; Angle, 2002). Emphasis on the former would be the relatively new element in a contemporary Confucianism, but 1B6 of the Mencius provides a striking anticipation of this element. Here King Xuan tells Mencius that his ability to be a true king for his people is thwarted by his desires for wealth and for sex. Mencius replies that if the King accords the common people the same privileges for wealth and sex, there would be no problem in becoming a true king.  Xunzi (see section 2.6) conceives of morality as a way of harmonizing the desires of individuals so that destructive conflict is replaced by productive harmony, and this gives the satisfaction of desire a central role in his version of Confucian ethics.  Later on in the tradition, Dai Zhen defended the legitimacy of self-interested desire as long as it is tempered by a proper concern for others (see Tiwald, 2011a; and section 2.8).  Rosemont (1991, 2004) has argued that “second-generation” “positive” rights to education and economic security are better grounded in the Chinese tradition than they have been in the West.   Along with the emphasis on li, the centrality of filial  piety is one of the most distinctive characteristics of Confucian  ethics. The Analects 2.6 says to give parents no cause for  anxiety other than illness, whereas 2.7, as mentioned earlier,  emphasizes the need for the material support of parents to be carried out in a respectful manner. 2.8 emphasizes that it is the expression  on one's face that is filial and not just taking on the burden of  work or letting elders partake of the wine and food before others.   Is obedience to parents always required of the filial child? What if  the child believes that parents are wrong and their wishes run  contrary to what is right or to ren? In those cases where one  thinks them wrong, what is one to do? The Analects 2.5  portrays Confucius as saying, “Do not disobey,” but when  queried further as to his meaning, he explains obedience in terms of  conformance to the rites for burying and sacrificing to deceased  parents. In 4.18 Confucius says that when one disagrees with one's  parents, one should remonstrate with them gently. Most translations  of what follows have Confucius concluding that if parents are not  persuaded, one should not oppose them (e.g., Lau, 1979; Slingerland,  2003; Waley, 1938), but it is possible to read the spare and  ambiguously worded passage as requiring instead that one not abandon  one's purpose in respectfully trying to change one's parents' minds  (Legge, 1971). In other Confucian texts, the question of whether  obedience is required has received different answers in the Confucian tradition. Chapters 1 and 2 of the Record of Ritual (Legge,  1967, vol. 1) say that one must obey if one fails to persuade one's  parent. On the other hand, Xunzi declares that following the  requirements of morality rather than the wishes of one's father is  part of the highest standard of conduct (29.1 of the Xunzi;  for a translation see Knoblock, 1988–94) and moreover that if  following the course of action mandated by one's father would bring  disgrace to the family and not following it would bring honor, then  not following is to act morally (29.2 of the Xunzi). Xunzi's position is supported in part by the distinction between service to  parents and obedience to them. It might very well fail to be of  service to parents if following their wishes is to bring moral  disgrace to them and the family.   Another ethical issue arising from the strong Confucian emphasis on  filial piety concerns possible conflicts between loyalty to parents  and loyalty to the ruler or public justice. Consider again  Analects 13.18, in which Confucius says that uprightness is  found in sons and fathers covering up for each other. In this case,  at least, loyalty to parents or to children takes precedence over  loyalty to ruler or to public justice. This precedence is one  implication of the Confucian doctrine of love with distinctions  (“love with distinctions” is the usual translation, but  perhaps “care with distinctions” is less misleading  because it covers both the emotionally freighted attitude toward kin  and a more distanced attitude toward strangers). Though all people  are owed moral concern, some are owed more than others, according to  the agent's relationship to them.   To introduce other kinds of problematic treated by Confucian  thinkers, it is necessary to identify a pivotal critic of  Confucianism in the classical period. Mozi (probably 5th  century B.C.E), who possibly was once a student of Confucianism, came to reject that teaching, partly on the grounds that the Confucian  emphasis on ritual was a wasteful expenditure of resources that could otherwise be used to meet the basic needs of the many (Mozi, chapters 25, 32; see Watson, 1967 for a translation). A related  criticism in the text of the Mozi is that tradition does not hold normative authority simply because it is tradition, for there  was a time when the practice in question was not tradition but new  (chapter 39). If a practice has no authority when it is new, it has  no authority at any subsequent time simply because it is getting  older. Mozi also rejected Confucianism on the grounds that partiality toward one's own (oneself, one's family, one's state) is at the root  of all destructive conflict (chapter 16). Partiality toward the self  causes the strong to rob the weak. Partiality toward one's family  causes great families wreak havoc with lesser families (it is not  difficult to see how this thought might apply to the idea of  protecting one's own, even if they have committed serious crimes  against others outside the family). Partiality toward one's state  causes great states attack small states. Mozi advocated the doctrine  of universal love or impartial concern.   The substantial following that Mohism gained in the classical period forced a response from Confucians (see Hansen, 1992, and Van Norden 2007, for a discussion of Mozi's pivotal impact on the Chinese tradition). They responded on two subjects: first, they had to address what is required by way of concern for all people and how to reconcile such concern with the greater concern for some that the Confucian doctrine of love with distinctions requires; second, they had to address the question of what kinds of concern are motivationally possible for human beings, partly in response to the Mohist argument that it is not difficult to act on impartial concern, and partly in response to others who were skeptical about the possibility of acting on any kind of genuinely other-regarding concern. Mencius, in the text purporting to be a record of his teachings, explicitly sets himself to the task of defending Confucianism not only against Mohism but the teachings of Yang Zhu. Yang's teachings seemed to Mencius to sit on the opposite end of the spectrum from Mohism (there is no surviving text purporting to articulate and defend Yangism). According to Mencius's characterization, Yang Zhu criticized both Mohism and Confucianism for asking people to sacrifice themselves for others. Yang Zhu on this view was an ethical egoist: i.e., one who holds that it is always right to promote one's own welfare. Mencius positioned Confucianism as the occupying the correct mean between the extremes of having concern only for oneself on the one hand and having an equal degree of concern for everyone.  Mencius 1A7 purports to be an account of a conversation  between Mencius and King Xuan, the ruler of a Chinese state. Mencius  is attempting to persuade the king to adopt the Confucian  dao or way of ruling. The king wonders whether he really can be the kind of king Mencius is advocating, and Mencius replies by  asking whether the following story he has heard about the king is  true. The story is that the king saw an ox being led to slaughter for a ritual sacrifice. The king decided to spare the ox and substituted  a lamb for the ritual sacrifice. Thinking back on that occasion, the  king recalls that it was the look in the ox's eyes, like that of an  innocent man being led to execution, that led him to substitute the  lamb. Mencius then comments that this story demonstrates the king's  capability to become a true king, and that all he has to do is to  extend the sort of compassion he showed the ox to his own people. If  he can care for an ox, he can care for his subjects. To say that he  can care for an ox but not for his people is like saying “my  strength is sufficient to lift heavy weight, but not enough to lift a feather” (translation adapted from Lau, 1970) His failure to  act on behalf of his people is due simply to his not acting, not to  an inability to act. What the king has to do, suggests Mencius, is to treat the aged in his family as aged, and then extend it to the aged  in other families; treat his young ones as young ones, and extend it  to the young ones of others; then you can turn the whole world in the palm of his hand.    The passage demonstrates one characteristic of the text that is  pertinent to Mencius's response to Mohism. In contrast to the  Analects, the ruler's duties to care for his people are more frequently discussed and play a more prominent role in the conception of a ruler's moral excellence. Mencius is portrayed in this text as  very much engaged in getting the kings of Chinese states to stop  mistreating their subjects, to stop drafting their subjects into  their wars of territorial expansion, and to avoid overtaxing them to  finance their wars and lavish projects. At the same time, Mencius's  assertion that the king is able to extend the kind of concern he  showed the ox toward his own people is a reply to those who advocate  Yangism on the grounds that acting for one's own sake is natural.  Mencius holds that natural compassion is a part of human nature. The  task of moral self-cultivation is the task of “extending” what is natural. What is natural, or at least more so, is properly  acting toward the aged and the young in one's family and then  extending that to the aged and the young in other families.   Extension is necessary because natural compassion is uneven compared to where it ought to extend. King Xuan may find it natural to have compassion for an innocent man about to be executed or a terrified ox about to be slaughtered, but not toward all his subjects when he is focusing on the benefits that a war of territorial expansion might bring him. This story of Mencius, the King, and the ox is rich material for reflection on the nature of moral development. It seems plausible that development must begin with something that is of the right nature to be shaped into the moral virtues, and also plausible that what we begin with is not as it fully should be. The questions posed by the story is what the natural basis of morality is and how further development occurs. Mencius's theory of the “four duan” addresses these questions. “Duan” literally means “tip of something” and is often translated as “beginnings” in this context.     What are the four beginnings of morality?  In 2A6 human nature  (ren xing) it is said that no person is devoid of a heart  (the word for heart in Chinese stands for the seat of thinking and  feeling, hence often translated as “the mind”) sensitive  to the suffering of others, and to illustrate this beginning, Mencius asks us to suppose that a man were suddenly to see a young child  about to fall into a well. Such a man would certainly be moved to  compassion, not because he wanted to get in the good graces of the  parents, nor because he wished to win the praise of his fellow  villagers or friends, nor yet because he disliked the cry of the  child. This natural compassion can develop into the virtue of  ren (in Mencius, ren is more often a particular virtue that concerns caring and hence is often translated as “benevolence”). A second beginning is the heart that feels shame in certain situations, e.g., in 6A10, Mencius says that if rice and soup are offered after being trampled upon, even a beggar would disdain them.  Under the right conditions, innate shame develops into the virtue of yi or righteousness—being able to do the right thing.  The third beginning is the heart that feels courtesy,e.g., the  younger sometimes instinctively knows to respect and be courteous to  the older. Under the right conditions, courtesy develops into  li, which as a virtue consists in the observance of the  rites or the virtue of ritual propriety. And finally, there is the  heart that has a sense of right and wrong (shi/fei, the  thing to do or not to do). Under the right conditions, this sense of  approval and disapproval develops into wisdom, which includes having  a grasp of the spirit behind moral rules so that one knows how to be  flexible in applying them.   It is important to note that Mencian beginnings of morality are not just blind feelings or primitive urges to act in certain ways, but contain within them certain intuitive judgments about what is right and wrong, what is to be disdained and what is deferential, respectful behavior. In the example of the beggar who does not accept food that has been trampled upon, it seems that Mencius is suggesting we have an original, unlearned sense that allows us to judge the sort of respect that is due to ourselves as human beings. Similarly, in suggesting that we have an unlearned sense of deference, Mencius is suggesting that we have an unlearned sense of what is due to others such as elders and our parents. Mencius's theory tallies with some of the more recent theories of emotion that point toward the intertwining of cognitive and affective dimensions (the theory does not necessarily imply, however, that the affective amounts to nothing more than the cognitive, as shall be discussed later).   The Mencius contains different metaphors that convey a view of human nature as the basis for moral development. On one metaphor, used in a debate with rival philosopher Gaozi in 6A2, the inborn goodness of human nature is like the tendency of water to flow downward.  The metaphor implies that human beings develop virtues in the absence of abnormal interference such as water being damned up or struck so that it splashes upward. On the other way of conceiving ethical development, the four beginnings are more like barley sprouts that need nurture analogous to sun, water, and fertile soil (6A7). That these two conceptions are significantly different can be seen through the recognition that “growing” conditions for the sprouts are not necessarily provided in the normal course of affairs. In some passages, extension is characterized as a matter of simply preserving or not losing what is given to one at birth (4B12, 4B19, 4B28, 6A10, 6A11), and such passages accord with the water metaphor in suggesting that moral development happens in the absence of abnormal interference.  In other places, the thinking seems to be more in accord with the sprout metaphor and identifies conditions for moral development that go well beyond noninterference: kings are held responsible for providing for their subjects a constant means of livelihood (1A7) that enables them to support parents and nurture wife and children; kings must also ensure the appropriate moral education about filial piety, about the duties that rulers and subjects owe to each other and about respect for the elder. Mencius furthermore recognized natural predispositions other than the four beginnings that could potentially lead human beings astray. He mentions the desires of the senses in this regard (6A15). This is why Mencius places responsibility on everyone to si (reflect on, turn over in one's mind) (6A14, 6A15) the manifestations of the four beginnings. With such reflection, human beings can recognize that virtue takes precedence over satisfaction of potentially conflicting desires and feelings (e.g., the priority of righteousness over the desire for life if one cannot have both), but lack of reflection will stunt moral development (6A9). If the deprivation of nourishing conditions is severe enough, the sprouts can be killed off (6A8). Thus, while Mencius is often characterized superficially by his saying that human nature is good (6A6), he means (at least when his thinking is guided by the sprout metaphor) that it contains predispositions to feel and act in morally appropriate ways and to make intuitive normative judgments that can with the right nurturing conditions give human beings guidance as to the proper emphasis to be given to the desires of the senses (see Shun, 1997; Van Norden, 2004, 2007). It is not surprising that there should be the kind of ambiguity expressed by the juxtaposition of the water and sprout metaphors in Mencius.  A very common contemporary conception of the innate comes very close to the implications of the water metaphor, i.e., that which develops under normal conditions.  On the other hand, we are also capable of recognizing that other things develop under a narrower or much more contingent (not necessarily realized in the normal course of affairs) set of conditions. A barley sprout develops only if human beings plant it in the right kind of soil and put effort into cultivating it.  Yet it seems intuitively correct to say that its direction of growth is innate.  If the conditions for growth are realized, it will become a barley plant, not a corn plant. Contemporary thinking about the innate bases of morality also shows this range of thinking. Claims that morality is constrained by an innate universal grammar (e.g., Hauser, 2008; Mikhail, 2011) seem closer to the idea that the moral (or its underlying universal structure) develops under normal conditions; other conceptions acknowledge more of a role for contingent factors (Nichols, 2004; Haidt and Bjorklund 2008).  The ambiguity in Mencius' thought, then, anticipates contemporary swings in thinking about the relative roles of what human beings are born with and what they acquire through learning, experience and culture.  Much of what is fascinating in Mencius lies in his explorations of how moral learning takes place and how this learning might also interact with emotion.  Consider now in combination the theme that the cognitive and affective go into the constitution of emotion and the theme that the emotional beginnings of morality can be extended through provision of the right kind of nurture. What is necessary for extension? Is cognitive extension, i.e., more moral knowledge, sufficient? The answer to this question depends on the nature of the intertwining between the cognitive and affective in emotions. Consider again the story of King Xuan and the ox. Mencius expresses confidence in King Xuan's ability to have compassion for his people, based on his act of compassion for the ox. Here the question of whether cognitive extension is sufficient emerges in the concrete. Was it sufficient for Mencius to have reminded the king that he has even more of a reason to spare his people from suffering than he had to spare the ox from suffering (more reason because Mencius clearly ranks the interests of animals below those of human beings, and because for him there is a good moral reason for the performance of ritual sacrifices)? Logical consistency alone cannot be expected to provide motivation, as David Nivison has pointed out (1996), but then what is Mencius trying to do with the King if not move him through logic?  Nowhere in the Mencius is there enough said to point to a definitive interpretation on this matter, but various reconstructions of possible positions can be given. Perhaps the King's innate nature contains all the motivation he needs, and all that Mencius is doing is reminding him that he has the motivation to spare his people. This interpretation seems roughly in accord with Mencius' likening moral development to water flowing downward: it will proceed unless interfered with.  Perhaps the King's nature needs some degree of transformation that starts with the sort of compassion he can feel for a terrified ox or an innocent man about to be executed and then expands the scope of that compassion to more of its appropriate objects.  This interpretation seems roughly in accord with Mencius' likening moral development to the growth of sprouts that need the appropriate water, soil and cultivation efforts. (See Im, 1999, Ivanhoe, 2002, Shun, 1997, Wong, 2002, Van Norden, 2007, and McRae 2011 for a range of different possible positions that could be attributed to Mencius). What seems philosophically fruitful about the Xuan and ox story is that it portrays an attempt at moral teaching of the kind that actually occurs in the moral life, and the ambiguity that it presents to the reader is fruitful precisely because it is not a completely theorized story. We are not told exactly what Mencius is trying to do with the King in terms of a theory of the nature of emotions and the relation between the cognitive and affective. Rather, we are led to reflect on the most plausible possibilities in trying to arrive at a reconstruction of what might have been meant by the text, as well as what might be the most illuminating position on its own merits. The story is particularly intriguing for those philosophers who believe in the possibility that learning can influence emotion.   What about the priority of filial loyalty over loyalty to the larger community? How does Mencius's theory of human nature address this point of contention between the Mohists and the Confucians? Mencius's response to the Mohists draws from his theory of human nature as containing not only the beginnings of affective motivations for being moral but also intuitive judgments about what is right and about what deserves the feeling of shame. His question to a Mohist, Yizi, is how Yizi can justify providing his deceased parents a special burial when the Mohist prescriptions are for a plain burial for anyone. Yizi's reply is to quote from the Book of History: the sage-kings treated all their subjects as if they were their new-born children. Yizi's interpretation of this saying is that there should be no distinctions in one's concern for people, though the practice of it may begin with one's parents (this may be an expression of the distinction between having equal concern and accepting practice that allow unequal treatment as long as the total system of practices can be justified on the basis of equal concern for all). Mencius's counter-reply is to ask whether Yizi really holds that a person loves his elder brother's son no more than his neighbor's baby. This is not just an assertion about what people tend to feel but also an assertion about what people intuitively hold to be right to feel and to do. Then Mencius makes a puzzling remark to the effect that Yizi is singling out a special feature in a certain case: “when a new-born babe creeps toward a well, it is not its fault.” This last part of Mencius's response is puzzling because Yizi did not say anything about a baby and a well. One possibility is that Yizi may have obliquely referred to Mencius's claim that all have the original and unlearned feeling of distress at seeing a child about to fall into a well. In other words, Yizi might have been challenging Mencius by asking, “Does not your own postulated unlearned compassion require us to treat that child the same way, regardless of whose child it is?” This way of taking Yizi helps makes sense of Mencius's reply. First, he points out what he takes to be the indisputably greater affection one feels for elder brother's son over one's neighbor's baby. Mencius grants that we all respond to a child about to fall into the well with alarm and distress, and it doesn't matter whose child it is. However, one cannot infer from this one special situation that we ought to have equal concern for everyone in all situations. The case of the child about to fall into the well has a special feature that makes it relevant to treat it as one would any child. That special feature seems to be innocence.   The Mencian position is premised on the principle that it is right to treat all people alike only when the ways they are alike are the most ethically relevant features of the situation. We should do the same  thing only when the similarities between two cases are the most  ethically relevant features of the situation. Mencius believes that  in many instances, the presence or absence of a family relationship  to a person is the most relevant feature (in deciding which children  to give gifts, the fact that one child is one's elder brother's son  and the other child is one's neighbor's child may be the most  relevant feature). In other types of situations, such as a child  about to fall into a well, it is the innocence that children share  that is the most relevant feature. That is why it is proper to feel  alarm or distress toward any child in that situation. The implied  application of this idea to the sage-kings' treatment of the people  is that these kings treated all people alike insofar as they did not  deserve the harm about to befall them.   Two issues arise from this response to Mohism. One issue is whether  Mencius has sufficient warrant to trust the kinds of intuitive  judgments he attributes to human nature. Mencius holds that the  beginnings of morality are sent by Heaven, but in the absence of such a metaphysical warrant, can these intuitive judgments be accepted,  particularly the ones that underwrite love with distinctions? Doubt  about the metaphysical warrant may not doom Mencius's response to  Mohism, however, if one holds that all normative theories ultimately  depend on intuitive judgments and if one has no good reason to be  skeptical about these judgments. Thus one might hold that whether or  not there is a metaphysical warrant, there is a great deal of  plausibility to the intuitive judgment about owing parents more  concern because they are the source of one's life and nurturance. Of  course one might also hold, as Mencius appears to hold, that people  are owed concern in virtue of their being human, and the possibility  for conflict of duties arises from these different sources of  concern. The second issue is how the Mencius text deals with conflicts of the sort exemplified by the sheep-stealing case in the  Analects.   The text contains themes embodying the theme of filial loyalty, and  as in the Analects, such loyalty takes precedence over  public justice. 7A35 tells a story about the sage-emperor Shun that  illustrates this theme. Because Shun was renowned for his filial  piety, Mencius is asked what Shun would have done if his father  killed a man. Mencius replies that Shun could not stop the judge from apprehending his father because the judge had the legal authority to  act. But then, Mencius says, Shun would have abdicated and fled with  his father to the edge of the sea. 5A2 and 5A3 describe the way that  Shun dealt with his half-brother Xiang's conspiring with his father  and stepmother to kill him. He enfeoffed Xiang because all he could  do as a brother is to love him. At the same time, Shun appointed  officials to administer the fief and to collect taxes and tributes,  to protect the people of Youbi from Xiang's potentially abusive  ruling. That is why some called Shun's act a banishment of Xiang.  However, the Shun stories exhibit a complexity that differentiates  them from the story of the sheep-stealing coverup in the  Analects. Though filial loyalty is clearly given a priority  in each story, there is in Shun's actions an acknowledgment of the  other value that comes into conflict with filial loyalty. Though Shun ultimately gives priority to filial loyalty in the case of his  father, his first action acknowledges the value of public justice by  declining to interfere with the judge while he is king. While Shun  declines to punish his half-brother, he protects the people of  Xiang's new fiefdom.   These Shun stories illustrate that an agent's response to a situation in which important values come into conflict need not be a strict  choice between honoring one value and wholly denying the other. While some sort of priority might have to be set in the end, there are also ways to acknowledge the value that is subordinated, but how exactly  that is to be done seems very much a matter of judgment in the  particular situation at hand. The Shun stories are an expression of  the Confucian theme that rightness cannot be judged on the basis of  exceptionless general principles but a matter of judgment in the  particular situation. It is difficult to see how this theme can be  taught except by the way it is done in the Mencius: through  exemplars of how it is done, and where the situation is presented  through some kind of narrative.   The characteristic form of reasoning in Mencius is analogical  reasoning. Starting from what seems true in one case and  “extending” similar conclusions to another case that has  similar conclusions. The trick in doing analogical reasoning  correctly, as suggested earlier, is to extend the similar conclusions only when the two cases share ethically relevant and decisive  features. The Mencius 4A17 shows a similar concern for  treating like cases alike. Mencius grants that to save the life of  one's drowning sister-in-law, one of course suspends the customary  rule of propriety prohibiting the touching of man and woman when they are giving and receiving. Another philosopher proposes to apply this  idea of suspending the usual rules of propriety to save something  else from drowning—the entire Empire! Mencius replies that one  saves one's sister-in-law with one's hand but cannot save the Empire  from drowning in chaos and corruption with one's hand. The Empire can only be pulled out by the Way. Mencius is rejecting the analogy  between compromising on ritual propriety to save the country and  compromising on propriety to save one's sister-in-law. There is a  relevant dissimilarity between the case of the drowning sister-in-law and saving the country: one cannot save the Empire through  compromises of ritual propriety, but instead by following the Way,  which itself involves following ritual propriety.   So what do we do when we confront a problematic case in the present  and we do not automatically know what the right thing to do is?  Mencius believes we can rely on past cases in which we have made  reliable judgments about, for example, what is right and shameful.  These reliable judgments made in past cases serve as paradigms or exemplars of correct ethical judgment. In encountering new  problem situations, we determine what sort of ethical reaction to the new situation is correct by asking which of the cases in which we've  had paradigm judgments are relevantly similar. We then determine what reactions to the new situations would be sufficiently similar to the  relevant paradigm judgments. Analogical reasoning is careful  attention and comparing to a concrete paradigm. The pool of  paradigm ethical judgments we have not only includes cases from our  own personal experience, but also include the experience of others,  especially those who serve as models of wise judgment. The stories of sage-king Shun in the Mencius text seem to give us such  paradigms. Shun's judgments on what to do about conflicts between  filial loyalty and public justice are perhaps meant to serve as  paradigm judgments. The conception of moral reasoning found in the  Mencius offers important material for reflection on the  process of moral judgment, especially for those who have come to  reject the simple model of judgment as deduction from premises  including a general moral principle and a description of the  conditions that make the principle applicable to the situation at  hand. The Mencian picture includes general moral considerations or  values that bear on the situation at hand, such as the importance of  family loyalty and public justice, but the picture also suggests that judgment in difficult situations includes finding a way to adequate  recognize and realize the values in play. “Finding a way” seems much more a matter of imagination and ingenuity rather than  deduction, but the Mencian picture also suggests that we can be  guided by exemplars of wise judgment. Identifying the relevant  similarities and dissimilarities between these exemplars and one's  present situation seems a matter of perception and close attention  rather than deduction from principle.    In the Xing E (“[Human] Nature is Bad”) chapter, Xunzi explicitly opposes his position on human nature to Mencius's.  He asserts that far from being good, human nature is bad because it includes a love of profit, envy and hatred, and desires of the eyes and ears that lead to violence and anarchy.  To avoid these consequences of indulging our spontaneous desires and impulses, it takes wei (conscious activity or deliberate effort), models and teaching, and guidance through observing ritual and yi (standards of righteousness).  Through such efforts, natural emotions and desires are transformed as a crooked piece of wood is steamed and then straightened upon a press frame.  All rituals and standards of righteousness are sheng (generated, produced) by the sages. These are generated from the conscious activity of the sages and not from their original nature.  Just as the vessel made by a potter is generated from his conscious activity and not his original nature, so the sages accumulated their thoughts and ideas and made a practice of conscious activity and precedents, thereby generating rituals and standards of righteousness.  Part of Xunzi's argument against Mencius is that human nature is not what is produced by conscious activity but rather that which is already there in human beings independently of conscious activity. Since it is clear that human beings are not already good but must work at it, it is clear that human nature cannot be good. When Mencius is attributed the water-metaphor view of the human inclination toward goodness, Xunzi's criticism has a point.  Becoming good does not seem to be merely a matter of not interfering with what will unfold in normal circumstances. However, when Mencius is attributed the sprout-metaphor view, the differences between him and Xunzi are more subtle.  On the sprout-metaphor view, effort and reflection must be put into the project of extending the sprouts to where they should be. It might be thought that one of the real differences between Mencius and Xunzi is that the former believes the necessary effort lies in growing or extending what lies in human nature, whereas the latter beieves that the effort lies in remaking and reshaping what lies in human nature.  Perhaps one believes that we can go “with the grain” of what we are born with, and the other believes we must go “against the grain.”  Each thinker emphasizes one of these opposing directions, but it is a credit to the subtlety and power of their views that each also takes into account the direction that the other emphasizes. Mencius acknowledges that moral development is hindered when a person pays more attention to the “small” parts of the self that include desires for sensual and material satisfaction and fails to use the heart-mind to reflect on the great parts that have normative priority.  In the chapter on rituals, Xunzi identifies natural and powerful emotional dispositions such as love of one's own kind that rituals must give expression to and that seem to form more of a positive basis for moral development. Such natural love is expressed in love for parents and intense grief upon their deaths, which must be given appropriate expression in mourning and burial rituals.  Thus Mencius acknowledges that there are natural parts of the self that must be disciplined and held in check while Xunzi acknowledges that there are natural parts that are largely congenial to morality in the sense that they are the natural basis for taking great satisfaction and contentment in virtue once one has gotten the self-aggrandizing desires and emotions under control.     Another disagreement between Mencius and Xunzi has to do with Mencius' claim that human nature contains moral predispositions.  As indicated earlier, such Mencian predispositions appear to contain moral intuitions (e.g., about what is shameful and right or wrong). On one plausible interpretation of Mencius, morality is part of the order imparted to the world by tian or heaven. By contrast, Xunzi seems to rule out the existence of natural predispositions with moral content when he claims that the sage kings generated ritual principles and precepts of moral duty.  One natural interpretation of “generated” is “created” or “invented.”  On these interpretations of each thinker, the contrast between Mencius and Xunzi exemplifies the contrast between a robust moral realism that has moral properties such as rightness existing independently of human invention and a constructivist position that makes moral properties dependent on human invention.  The interpretation of Xunzi as a constructivist does not necessarily commit him to a denial of the objectivity of morality or to the denial that there is a single objectively correct morality.  It is possible to see Xunzi as a constructivist about morality but also as an objectivist (see Nivison, 1991). On the constructivist interpretation, Xunzi holds a functional conception of morality, according to which it is invented to harmonize the interests of individuals and to constrain and transform the heedless pursuit of short-term gratification for the sake of promoting the long-term interests of the individual and the group. Ritual principles and moral precepts are invented to accomplish such a function, and human nature constrains which of the possible principles and precepts are better or worse for accomplishing that function. Xunzi's point about the mourning rituals prescribed by Confucians being suited to the nature of human love for one's parents is a case in point.   Xunzi's functional theory of morality bears added interest for those exploring the possibilities of a naturalistic approach to morality. One fairly common interpretation of Xunzi's conception of tian or heaven is that it is an order-giving force in the cosmos that is neutral to whatever human beings have come to regard as right and good. In fact, a translation that better conveys such a meaning for ‘tian’ is “nature,” which is the translation given by Knoblock's valued translation of the Xunzi.  Textual passages that support this interpretation stress that tian operates according to patterns that remain constant no matter what human beings do or whether they appeal to it for good fortune (chapter 17).  It is the proper task of human beings to understand what these patterns are in order to take advantage of them (e.g., so that they may know to plow in the spring, weed in the summer, harvest in the fall, and store in the winter). Such a view of the difference between Xunzi and Mencius, however, depends on interpretations that been disputed in favor of alternative interpretations. Roger Ames (1991, 2002) defends an interpretation of Mencius that gives the greatest role in shaping the direction of moral development to human “creative social intelligence” rather than tian conceived as a force operating independently of human beings. For a contrasting view, see Irene Bloom (1994, 1997, 2002), who, sometimes in response to Ames, defends a greater role for biology in her interpretation of Mencius while also leaving an important role for culture.  The Xunzi text is also susceptible to very different interpretations, partly because of the originality of its synthesis of several streams of thought: Confucianism, Daoism, Mohism, and the Jixia Academy. When Xunzi asserts that tian is unresponsive to human supplication and ritual sacrifice, it looks as if he might be drawing from Daoism (see below), but when he refers to the tian-given faculties human beings should exercise to solve the problem of conflict, he might be interpreted as implying that tian conferred these faculties upon human beings for the purpose of solving the problem of conflict and realizing fulfilling human lives together (see Eno 1990; and Machle, 1993 for an exploration of the rich interpretive possibilities regarding Xunzi's conception of tian).  While it might still be possible to interpret Xunzi as a constructivist on the origin of morality, this alternative interpretation might suggest that Xunzi's tian had a blueprint it intended human beings to fulfill.  Under alternative interpretations of Mencius and Xunzi, then, the differences do not disappear, but they might form even more subtle contrasts.   Even some of the theoretical difficulties that Xunzi has are  instructive. In pressing his case against Mencius for the badness of  human nature, he stresses the self-serving drives of human nature.  Unlike Hobbes, he does not accept that human beings are inevitably  motivated by self-interest, and he does not try to base adherence to  moral norms on the basis of self-interest alone. This arguably is a  promising move, given the heavy criticism that can be directed  against the Hobbesian project and subsequent attempts to carry it out its basic idea (see Gauthier, 1986 for such an attempt; see  Vallentyne, 1991 for criticism). Xunzi rather argues that the  problems created by unrestrained self-interest point to the need to  transform human motivation. People can come to love moral virtue and  the rites for their own sakes, and this is necessary, on Xunzi's  view, for a stable solution to the problem of conflict between  self-interested individuals. At times, Xunzi suggests that the  intellect can override the desires arising from the natural emotions, but it remains unclear as to how self-regarding motivations can  become a love of virtue and the rites simply because the intellect  approves of them. The parts of Xunzi asserting a more complex picture of human motivation suggest a solution. If human beings are capable  of genuine compassion and concern for others, as the chapter on rites suggests, then the ritual principles and moral precepts invented by  the sage kings have some motivational leverage for the birth of a  love of virtue and rites. Such a solution draws from what  are arguably some of the most plausible positions of Mencius: that  human beings are capable of altruism and compassion even if they are  motivated much of the time by self-interest; and that moral  transformation is a matter of cultivating and extending a  motivational substance that is congenial to morality.   Mencius and Xunzi, then, offer sophisticated theories that expand the range of possible ways of understanding moral knowledge, motivation,  and the nature of morality itself. Mencius presents an interesting  conception of the way that we reason by analogy from intuitive  judgments and also a plausible conception of innate predispositions  that are compatible with a major role for learning and upbringing in  the development of character and virtue. Those who are more  naturalistically inclined in their approach to morality (at least  insofar as this involves resisting the idea of a transcendent source  of moral properties) may find Xunzi's functional conception of  morality appealing, especially if it allows for a degree of  objectivity regarding the content of morality. In recent years, Gilbert Harman (1998–99, 1999–2000) and John Doris (2002) have pointed to the influence of situations over attitude and behavior as a problem for virtue ethics. Citing empirical work in social psychology, Harman and Doris claim that the extensive and surprising influence of situational factors undermines the commonsense idea that people possess stable character traits that explain what they do.  Some of the classic psychological studies used in this argument appear to show that ordinary respectable American citizens will administer dangerous electrical shocks to an innocent person when urged to do so by an experimenter in a lab coat (Milgram 1974), and that being late for an appointment is the most influential factor in whether a seminary student will stop and help someone who seems to be falling ill, even if the appointment is to attend a lecture on the Good Samaritan (Darley and Batson 1973).  Such studies pose a problem not only for the commonsense conception of character traits, but also for virtue ethics, which appear to assume the possibility of achieving stable character traits that are virtues.  Perhaps human beings are inevitably creatures who are influenced by the situation in which they act and not by any characterlogical dispositions they bring with them to the situation.  If so, it appears that the ideal of attaining virtues is misguided. There are good reasons to expect Confucianism to offer some distinctive resources for dealing with this problem.  First, as pointed out in 2.3, Confucians appreciate the relational nature of human life: who we are as persons very much includes our social context: the people with whom we are in relationship and our institutions and practices. So they are very much in a position to appreciate situational influences on how human beings think, feel, and act.  Second, they appear to hold something like a conception of virtues as stable character traits that are resistant to undue situational influences.  As noted in 2.3, and this pertains to the challenge posed by the Milgram study, the Confucians emphasize the importance of living according to one's own understanding of what is right and good even if others do not see it the same way. Third, as noted at the beginning of this entry, Chinese philosophy in general is distinguished by a focus on the practical.  This is illustrated in the Confucian case by the tradition of scholar-officials who not only wrote about and taught the importance of the ethical to the political life, but strove to enact this importance in their own careers.  As a consequence, they were very much concerned with specifying in practical terms how one could go about cultivating the virtues in oneself.  Fourth, and this is very much in response to the combination of the previous points, they describe a long and arduous program of ethical training to inculcate the virtues. As Edward Slingerland (2011) has put it, Confucianism is in a good position to appreciate the “high bar” challenge of situational influence to the project of cultivating the virtues in oneself and others.  In response to this challenge, their program of ethical training includes study of the classics (after the ancient period, the classics came to include, of course, the Analects and the Mencius), memorized and rehearsed until they become fully internalized and embedded in the unconscious patterns of thought that are so powerful in shaping what we do in everyday life (see Slingerland 2009).  This is one characteristic pattern of Confucian self-cultivation: one consciously, deliberately and assiduously undertakes a program that inculcates dispositions to have ethically appropriate emotional responses and patterns of conduct.  The intent is to make the dispositions for these responses reliable and resistant to undue situational influence.   Furthermore, the Confucians very much appreciated the power of models to inspire, to make one want to transcend one's present self.  The psychologist Jonathan Haidt (2003) has given empirical evidence for an emotion he calls “elevation,” which is something like awe and admiration upon contemplating the morally admirable. The Analects, in fact, has been read as a record of how a group of men gathered around a teacher with the power to elevate, and as a record of how this group created a culture in which goals of self-transformation were treated as collaborative projects.  These people not only discussed the nature of self-cultivation but enacted it as a relational process in which they supported one another, reinforced their common goals, and served as checks on each other in case they went off the path, the dao.  They were each other's situational influences. See Sarkissian, 2010 for the argument that Confucius shows how one can turn the power of situations on people's attitudes and behavior toward positive ends; if situations can influence people, one can through small details of comportment and attitude be a situational influence on others that tilts things toward a better course. Training in ritual, li, takes on another dimension of importance in light of the situationist problem.  As noted in section 2.2 Confucian rituals help to express attitudes of respect and reverence for others that can exist independently of the rituals themselves, but rituals provide conventionally established, symbolic ways to express these attitudes toward others.  Ritual forms, therefore, give participants manifold and (just as importantly) regularly recurring ways to act on and therefore to strengthen the right attitudes and behavioral dispositions.  Given the renewed appreciation in contemporary psychology for the power of emotions to influence attitude and behavior, the resource offered by ritual training should not be ignored by anyone concerned about the problem of how to resist undue situational influence. Finally, Confucianism points to the possibility that individuals, under the right circumstances and encouragement, can enhance their reflective control of their own emotions and impulses.  Mencius' conversation with King Xuan can be conceived as an attempt to get the king to nourish his moral sprouts by reflecting on them, to become aware of what his moral emotions are (such as compassion) and to take action to grow them.  It should be noted that contemporary psychology is exploring some possible venues for the regulation of one's emotions and impulses.  See Walter Mischel's by-now classic study (1989) of children who are able to defer gratification for greater reward in the future (here's one marshmallow; if you can wait fifteen minutes before you eat it you can have another one).  It turns out the effective delayers use strategies of diverting their attentional focus from the marshmallow sitting in front of them.  Projects are underway to teach children these strategies.  See Lieberman (2011) and Creswell (2007) for studies indicating that meditation focused on cultivating compassion in oneself can be effective through enhancing one's ability to identify and gain better control of one's emotions. Finally, in considering why robust character traits that could qualify as virtues are so rare, we should consider the perspective that very much informs the self-cultivation projects of Confucius and his students.  They were very much aware of the lack of virtue as a social and political condition and not merely as an individual condition that just happened to be widespread (Hutton 2006 makes this point).  There is a reason why Confucius and Mencius after him sought to have kings adopt their teachings.  If in fact the achievement of robust virtues requires long and hard training, supported and guided by others who have taken similar paths before, and if as Mencius 1A7 holds, people cannot engage in such training until they have the material security that enables them to take their minds off the sheer task of survival, then it is no mystery at all why there are no such traits in societies structured to achieve very different goals. Ironically, the situationist psychological experiments do not take into account this underlying relational factor that might deeply influence the ability of people to form robust virtues, and neither do the philosophical critics of virtue ethics who rely on the situationist experimental evidence.   Zhu Xi (1130–1200) reinterpreted ethical themes inherited from the classical thinkers and grounded them in a cosmology and metaphysics that had absorbed the influence of Buddhism, particularly as it transformed in its interaction with Daoism when entering China (see the chapters on Zhu Xi and Wang Yang Ming in Ivanhoe, 1993 for the neo-Confucian reaction Buddhism and Daoism). Zhu established the Confucian canon that served as a basis for the Chinese civil service examination, including the Analects and Mencius, along with the Great Learning (Da Xue) and Doctrine of the Mean (Zhong Yong). In fact, he had his greatest influence through the commentaries he wrote on these texts (see Gardner, 2003 for a discussion of the influence of Zhu Xi's reading of the Analects). Zhu affirmed the Mencian theme that human nature is good, with greater emphasis on that vein of thought in the Mencius that stresses that goodness is internal to human beings and will develop in the absence of interference.  This reading of Mencius is unsurprising given the influence of Buddhism on the Neo-Confucians, and it meant the demotion of Xunzi within the influential Neo-Confucian reading of the tradition.  Much of Zhu's metaphysics centers on the relation between li (in this case not ritual but principle or pattern or the fit and coherence between things) and qi (the material force or energy stuff from which objects emerge and return at the end of their existence). How Zhu Xi conceived this relation is a matter of interpretive debate.  Some view him as holding a dualistic metaphysics in analogy to the way that Plato's distinction between the Forms and the sensible world is often taken to embody a metaphysical dualism (Fung, 1948, chapter 25). However, others interpret Zhu's li not as ontologically prior to qi but rather as being a pattern or deep structure that is immanent within and expressed by qi and delineates the range and possibilities of qi's transformations (Graham, 1986; Thompson, 1988). Others have noted that li appears to have both subjective and objective aspects: it lays down the lines along which everything moves in a way that is independent of personal desires; but on the other hand, it is related to the pattern of one's profoundest responses to things (see Angle, 2009, for an attempt to reconcile these aspects).  With regard to qi, Zhu Xi held that even though goodness is within human nature, individuals differed with respect to their native endowment of energy stuff, and that this, togther with differences in their family and social circumstances, affected the development of their good natures.    Zhu Xi saw one's self-cultivation as a matter of apprehending the  li of one's own mind, largely through meditation practice,  and, at the same time, investigating the li or patterns of  things not only as revealed in texts such as the Analects  but as embodied in concrete situations, including the patterns in  relationships between persons. Both kinds of activities must be  conducted with jing, which in Zhu's thought means respectful attention. Zhu is sometimes characterized as a kind of scholastic,  but he emphasized study of the texts in conjunction with acting, with observing li in external situations and relationships, and  realizing the correspondence between the li of one's own  mind and the li of texts and of situations and  relationships. Apprehending li in a concrete situation in  order to respond appropriately to it was not a simple matter of  absorbing generalizations from texts and applying it to the  situation, but rather a matter of bringing to bear a mind that has  been cultivated by meditation and by study of the texts and by  observing and acting in previous situations. Such a mind can take  into account relevant ethical considerations and is disciplined in  attending to the situation (see the chapter on Zhu Xi in Ivanhoe,  1993; and Gardner, 1990).   The other Neo-Confucian whose influence rivals that of Zhu Xi is Wang Yang Ming (1472–1529). Wang saw Zhu's emphasis on the  investigation of patterns in external things as overly scholastic and leading to abstract speculation rather than practical guidance. He  rejected what he saw to be the intellectualization of personal  realization, and identified the mind with li (xin ji  li or mind is pattern or principle). This means that the  dispositions to judge properly the appropriate action in various  situations constitute the mind's original pure state. Li is  not to be sought as a pattern residing in an independently existing  external world but embodied in judgments of the mind (this seems to  commit Wang to an identification of the world with the experienced  world and to a denial of a mind-independent world). Wang's version of the Mencian theme that human nature is good is therefore even more   innatist  than Zhu Xi's (see Ivanhoe, 1990, for a  comparison of Mencius and Wang Yang Ming). Original goodness does not need completion through learning about the external world. Then why  aren't all people fully good? Why are some very bad? Wang's answer is that selfish desires cloud the sun of the complete and perfect moral  mind, and that the task of human beings is to eliminate selfish  desires and recover that mind (Chan, 1963, sections 21, 62).   One of Wang's better-known themes is the unity of knowledge and  action. There can be no gap between knowing what to do and doing it.  Genuine knowledge is necessarily practical. Selfish desires and  emotions get in the way of achieving genuine knowledge. One way of  understanding this identification is to take knowledge as a knowing  how to act that is expressed in acting. One expresses one's knowing  how to ride a bicycle by riding, not by articulating propositions  about how to ride a bicycle that one might not be able to act upon.  Furthermore, knowledge is particularist and context-sensitive in  nature and is expressed in intuitive reactions to the present moment. Knowing how to ride a bicycle is continually reacting by shifting  one's body first this way and then that way to the changing center of gravity of one's body in tandem with the bicycle. The moral life, on  Wang's view, is like that rather than applying a static set of  generalizations one learns before encountering the situations in  which one needs to act. Notice also that the kinesthetic sensations  blend seamlessly with the bodily responses to those sensations that  help one to go forward and keep one's balance on a bicycle. In  genuine moral knowledge, perception of the situation at hand blends  seamlessly with the right response to it. In emphasizing that the ultimate ideal is a kind of spontaneous and intuitive perceiving of the situation and the right response to it, Wang Yang Ming joins with Zhu Xi.  However, this does not mean that there were not important dissenting voices.  Dai Zhen defended an ethical ideal in which deliberative reflection on the right thing to do continues to play an important role and not just at stages in which one is a considerable distance from realizing the ideal.  Dai particularly emphasizes the necessity for imagining the effects of one's actions on others, which might help one better share their sorrows and joys.  Whereas Zhu equated spontaneous and non-conscious identification with others as a reflection of the wholeheartedness of one's motivations, Dai counters that needing to deliberate over the right thing to do is compatible with a wholehearted acting on one's judgment when one arrives at it.  Dai is inclined to give desires for the self a legitimate place in ethical reflection because he holds that one's valuing of relationships can be strengthened when one understands that the other's flourishing is tied up with one's own (see Tiwald 2010, 2011a, 2011b).   Mozi, as indicated earlier, advocated the doctrine of impartial  concern. The Mozi text does not make clear what this  doctrine amounts to in practice. Mozi criticizes partial-minded  people who do nothing positive for others if these others are not  related to them in the right way. Does this mean that to have  impartial concern is to have equal concern for others no matter what  one's relationship to them? Mozi's opposition to Confucianism might  be taken to imply a positive answer to this question. However, some  of Mozi's argumentation also presupposes that it is one's duty to see that the needs of one's family are provided for. He discusses filial  piety as a virtue. This might suggest that one has special  responsibility for one's family and parents.   One way to reconcile these comments is to distinguish the requirement that one have equal concern from the requirement that one treat  others equally. We might reasonably attribute the former to Mozi but  not the latter, so as to leave open the permissibility of individual  agents treating people unequally (this seems to have been the  position adopted by later Mohists in the so-called Mohist  Canons; see Fraser, 2007). This might be permissible if agents  are acting within a system of practices that can be justified as a  whole on the basis of equal concern for all people. For example,  suppose we have a system in which families have the resources to  satisfy the needs of their own members, or, if families or  individuals lack such resources on their own, they are given aid from some common pool of resources. Chapter 19 makes explicit reference to the need to provide for those without family to care for them. This  arrangement might seem morally acceptable from the standpoint of  equal concern for each person and at the same time allow for  individual agents to make extra efforts on behalf of their own family members. Thus construed, Mozi's ethics is a kind of consequentialism  that measures rightness in terms of consequences, where each person's welfare is to be considered equally, and where what is judged to be  right might be a practice as well as particular actions.   Because Confucian care with distinctions requires the extension of  care to non-kin, and because a reasonable interpretation or  reconstruction of Mozi's impartial concern would allow special  treatment of one's kin, there is not as dramatic a difference as one  might first think between Confucian and Mohist ethics on the  practical level. However, there might indeed be significant  differences when loyalty to kin and commitment to public justice come into conflict, and certainly differences on the value of ritual  performance (though many Confucians might be unhappy with the Mohist  portrayal of their tradition as insisting on extravagantly expensive  ritual with musical accompaniment). One source of that difference  lies in the plurality of sources of duty in Confucianism, in contrast to monistic Mohist consequentialism, where value comes down to the  promotion of benefit and avoidance of harm, where benefit and harm  are specified in fairly narrow ways. By contrast, consider the kind  of reasons given in the Analects for filial actions. One  reason is the duty to reciprocate great benefits. This reason emerges in Analects 8.3, in which Zengzi is portrayed as near death. He bids his students to look at his hands and feet, and quotes lines  from the Book of Odes to convey the idea that all his life he has  been keeping his body intact as part of his duty to his parents. In  17.21, Confucius defends the traditional three-year mourning period  for the death of parents, implying that a period shorter than three  years is inappropriate given that a child is completely dependent on  his parents for three years. For the Confucians, special  relationships create special duties that necessarily differ in their  source from duties to strangers outside the family and outside one's  state.   The Mozi is quite explicit in its consequentialism. Chapter  35 names three fa or standards for judging the viability of  beliefs and theories. One standard is of usefulness. In applying this standard, one assesses the viability of a belief or theory according  to the beneficial or harmful consequences of acting on it. Another  standard is that of consulting the origin, which is the historical  record on the actions of the sage-kings. One determines whether the  belief or theory being judged accords with those actions. The third  standard is looking at evidence provided by the eyes and ears of the  people. This seems to refer to observations that garner some degree  of intersubjective consensus. Each standard is presented as if its  validity might be independent from the others, but there are  indications that the standard of usefulness is the most basic one.  For one thing, consulting the record of the sage-kings' actions  hardly seems to be a good idea in Mohist terms given the Mohist  objection to valuing tradition for its own sake, unless  these actions are good guides because they produced good results, a  historical judgment that was commonly accepted by otherwise disputing philosophical schools. Furthermore, arguments given in the  Mozi that are purportedly based on intersubjective  observation seem extremely dubious, e.g., that ghosts exist because  stories are told about them very often. At one point in chapter 31,  in fact, the possibility that ghosts do not exist is explicitly  admitted, but sacrifices to spirits are justified on the grounds that they produce good effects among the living. Ghosts in general are put to good use in the text: their primary activity is to avenge  themselves upon the living persons who have done them wrong. The  standard of usefulness guides application of the other standards.  Even the attempted justification of the standard of usefulness by  reference to the will of tian or Heaven (in chapter 26) has  a suspect circularity to it. We are to promote benefits and avoid  harms because that is the will of Heaven, and Heaven's will is to be  relied upon because it is the wisest and noblest of all agents. But  what could be the criterion for a being's being wise and noble  exception the promotion of benefits and avoidance of harms?  Furthermore, the will of Heaven is demonstrated by the fact that  wrongdoers are punished and the virtuous rewarded. Again, the  evidence seems highly selective and is guided by the very standard of usefulness that it is supposedly being justified.   Is Mohist consequentialism comparable to Western utilitarianism? They are alike in that both kinds of ethic stress impartial concern and  judgment of what is right in terms of promoting benefit and avoiding  harm. Disanalogies are important here also. There is no attempt to  make explicit in the Mozi how exactly the consequences of alternative actions or practices are to be compared against each other in  deciding what to do. This contrasts with contemporary forms of  utilitarianism that explicitly make maximizing the net greatest sum  total of good over bad the criterion of right action or practice (but neither Mill nor Bentham were very explicit about this matter  either). Another difference is that Mozi's conception of benefit is  very concrete and relatively narrow, lacking in any psychological  dimension such as happiness. To promote benefits is to relieve  poverty, increase the population, and promote stability and order.   For some philosophers, Confucian acceptance of the plural sources of  moral duty is the right position, and they will see the Mohist  position as implausibly reductive of the complexity of the moral  life. However, one burden placed on such a position is to explain how conflicts between these different sources of moral duty can be dealt  with, and it is not clear from the Analects how the  Confucian junzi makes the right choices in the face of such  conflicts. The Mohist position promises a foundational standard for  dealing with such conflicts—promoting benefits and avoiding  harms, with each person being counted equally. The standard is vague  on how benefits and harms are to be aggregated in judging the  rightness of actions and practices, and one might well raise  questions as to how benefits and harms are ultimately to be  distributed across persons, and whether a purely consequentialist  distribution really provides morally acceptable results. On the other hand, Mohists may claim that they have at least provided some  standard to work with.   Other important questions arose in the debate between the Confucians  and the Mohists. Much of the debate that took place had to do with  skepticism about the ability of human beings to act on the doctrine  of impartial concern. Isn't partiality toward one's own natural and  inevitable? One Mohist response (chapter 16) to this question is that there is no particular problem in getting people to act in this way  once the facts are brought before them. One such alleged fact is that people respond in kind to the treatment they receive (curiously,  reciprocity serves as a norm for Confucians, it serves as a  generalization for Mohists). So, if one wishes others to  confer benefits on oneself, one confers benefits on them. If one  wishes good for one's family, one will confer benefits on other  families so that they will confer benefits on one's own family.  Another Mohist response is that the sage kings practiced impartial  concern, so it must be possible. Still another response is that  rulers can motivate their subjects to do even very difficult things.  The Mohist theme that no transformation of human character is needed  to act on the right values stands in striking contrast to the  Confucian theme that intellectual and emotional self-transformation  of character is required to follow the dao.   It may appear that the Mohist arguments for acting on impartial  concern are rather superficial and invite quick refutation, but  Confucians could also be accused of glossing over the difficulties of getting people to have concern for all (if not equal and impartial  concern). As Analects 1.2 has it, the achievement of proper  relationships within the family is the basis of the achievement of  proper relationships to those outside the family, but this is not  only to neglect the possibility that it is much easier to develop  concern for those with whom one is interdependent but also to neglect conflicts of the sort illustrated by the story of Shun's father  murdering a man. In circumstances where concern for family regularly  comes into tension with concern for those outside the family it may  be very difficult indeed for filial concern to develop into concern  for all.   In the Daodejing (the text is associated with Laozi and is  thought to have originated sometime in the period of  6th-3rd century B.C.E.) and Zhuangzi  (a text associated with the historical Zhuangzi who lived in the  4th century B.C.E.) the focus shifts from the human social world to the cosmos, in which that human world often appears to be  tiny and insignificant or even comically and absurdly self-important. It may seem that such a distanced and detached perspective has no  ethical content or implications, but that is to assume an overly  narrow vision of the ethical. In its own way, Daoism addresses as  much as Confucianism does questions as to how one ought to live one's life. Daoist ethics emphasizes appropriate responsiveness to the  broader world that shapes and enfolds the human social world.   The nature of the vision of the broader world is open to dispute. A  traditional interpretation of the Daodejing is that it  conveys a metaphysical vision of the dao as the source of  all things, and that this source is specially associated in nonbeing  and emptiness as contrasted with being, perhaps suggesting that the  dao is an indeterminate ontological ground in which the  myriad individual things are incipient. Some contemporary  commentators hold that the traditional interpretation is an  imposition on the text of later metaphysical concerns (Hansen, 1992;  LaFargue, 1992). Others hew closer to the traditional interpretation, citing passages such as those in chapter 4, where Dao is described as being empty, as seeming something like the ancestor of the myriad of  things, as appearing to precede the Lord (di).   However that issue is resolved, it is apparent that a certain  conception of the patterns of nature is embedded in the text and  informs its ethical recommendations. Consider the characterizations  of natural processes as falling into one or another of opposites:  there is the active, aggressive, hard, and the male, on the one hand; and there is the passive, yielding, soft, and female, on the other  hand (later these forces were much more explicitly associated with  yang and yin). Conventional “knowledge” and “wisdom” dichotomizes processes into one or another  of these categories and values the first over the second. The  Daodejing extols the efficacy of the second. Whereas the  first is associated with strength, the second, it is often said,  possesses a deeper, underlying strength as demonstrated by water  overcoming the hard and unyielding (chapter 78). Hence a  “soft” style of action, wu wei (literally,  “nonaction” but less misleadingly translated as  effortless action) is recommended, even as a style of ruling. For  example, chapter 66 says that one who desires to rule must in his  words humble himself before the people, and that one who desires to  lead the people must in his person follow them. Chapter 75 says that  rulers eat up too much in taxes and therefore people are hungry.  Rulers are too fond of action and therefore the people are difficult  to govern. Setting too much store on life makes people treat death  lightly. The last point brings out the related theme that striving  after something often produces the opposite of the intended result.  One of the more prominent themes in the Daodejing is the  rejection of moralism: a preoccupation with and striving to become  good or virtuous. Chapter 19 says to exterminate ren and  discard yi (righteousness or rectitude), and the people will recover filial love.   One crucial ambiguity of the text is whether the “soft”  wu wei style of action is meant consistently to be extolled  over the “hard” style (as Lau claims in his introduction  to his translation of the Daodejing, 1963), or whether the  reversal of valuation is merely a heuristic device meant to correct a common human tendency to err in the direction of consistently valuing the hard style (LaFargue, 1992). The second alternative is consistent with a theme plausibly attributed to the text: that all dichotomies  and all valuations based on them are unreliable in the end, even  evaluations that are reversals of the conventionally accepted ones.  Prescriptions to follow the “soft” style, taken as  exceptionless generalizations, are no more reliable than the  conventional wisdom to follow the “hard” style. On the  other hand, many of the prescriptions in the Daodejing seem  premised on the conception of there being genuine human needs that  are simple and few in number, and that desires going beyond these  needs are the source of trouble and conflict. Prescriptions for the  ruler seem to be aimed at bringing about a reversion to a kind of  primitivist state of society where no “improvements” are  sought or desired. Carried to its logical limit, this primitivism  implies the existence of a natural goodness with which human beings  ought to become attuned. Indeed, the first of the three treasures of  chapter 67 is ci or compassion. The ethics of the  Daodejing is in these respects less radical and iconoclastic than some of its anti-moralistic language might suggest. If we are  not to strive after goodness, it is there nevertheless as something  that we must recover.   On this point the Zhuangzi often sounds a much more  skeptical note. In the second (“Equalizing All Things”)  chapter of that text, the following questions go unanswered:  “How do I know that to take pleasure in life is not a delusion? How do I know that we who hate death are not exiles since childhood  who have forgotten the way home?” (translation from Graham,  1989, 59). The human pretension to know what is true and important is lampooned by comparing it to the pretension of the cicada and turtle  dove to know by their own experiences of flight the possibilities of  how high creatures can fly. There is no vision of a primitivist  utopia here either. Rather, the dominant attitude towards the  possibility of large-scale social change for the better is pessimism. It is a dangerous task for the idealist to undertake, and one that  will probably end badly for the idealist because rulers don't like to be lectured on their failings.   Yet if there is no natural goodness that makes possible a social  utopia, there still appears to be a grain of things to which human  beings can become attuned. A pessimistic Confucius tells his  idealistic student Yan Hui that he will probably get himself killed  in trying to change the ways of a callous and violent ruler, but  Confucius goes on to say that if he insists on trying, Yan Hui must  refrain from formulating plans and goals. Such preconceptions will  only interfere with seeing the ruler as he is and how he must be  dealt with (there is a grain, then, unique to each human being to  which one must become attuned to deal with him or her). So Yan Hui  must prepare not with plans but by fasting and emptying his mind.  Elsewhere in the text, there are happier references to activities  that involve attunement to the grain of whatever is at hand. These  forms of activity are presented as supremely satisfying. The most  prominent example is that of Cook Ding, the cook who is able to wield his knife so skillfully in cutting up oxen that it flows without a  nick through the spaces within the joints. Cook Ding has gotten past  the stage where he sees with his eyes while cutting the ox; instead  his qi or vital energies move freely to where they must go.  The kind of phenomenology to which the Zhuangzi refers is  one in which there is no self-conscious guiding of one's actions but  rather a complete absorption with the matter of hand. The efficacy  and effortlessness of such activities might appear to suggest  privileged veridical access to the situation and material at hand.   Complete absorption in the matter at hand seems to involve the  ability to keep one's desires from interfering with one's attention.  The Daodejing contains epigrams about the desirability of  being desireless, but chapter 1 of the Zhuangzi includes an  entertaining story that conveys this lesson. Huizi tries to figure  out what to do with the shells of some huge gourds he had grown. He  tried using them as water dippers and water containers, but they are  too large and heavy for those purposes. Not being able to discover a  purpose for them, he smashes them to pieces. Zhuangzi chides his  friend for having underbrush in his head and not realizing that he  could have lashed the gourds together to make a raft for floating  about on the lakes and the rivers. A recurrent theme throughout the  first chapter is that we are ruled by our preconceptions of the uses  of things, which keeps us from being able to recognize the usefulness of the “useless.” When performing skill activities such  as Cook Ding's, preoccupation with the “uses” of these  activities can interfere with our ability to perform them well.  Woodcarver Qing (chapter 19 of the Zhuangzi) makes marvelous bellstands. When he goes to make one, he fasts in order to still his  mind. As he fasts, the distracting thoughts of congratulation and  reward melt away, honors and salary, blame and praise, skill and  clumsiness, even his awareness of having a body and limbs. Only when  he is able to focus does he go into the forest to observe the nature  of the wood, and only then does he have a complete vision of the  bellstand.   Interpretations of the Zhuangzi tend to give primacy either  to the skeptical passages or to the passages suggesting special  access to the grain of things. On the first option, Zhuangzi simply  appreciates the many perspectives on the world one could have, the  many ways of dividing the world up by sets of distinctions, none of  which can be shown in a non-question-begging manner to be superior to the others (Hansen, 1992, 2003). On the second option, Zhuangzi is  often taken to hold in a kind of ineffable and nonconceptual access  to the world, an access that makes possible the efficacy of  activities such as Cook Ding's (Ivanhoe, 1996; Roth 1999, 2000). A  third possibility is that the text demonstrates a kind of continuing  dialectic between skepticism and the conviction that one has genuine  knowledge, and that the dialectic has no envisioned end. The  dialectic includes a stage of skeptical questioning of whatever one's current beliefs are, but the aim is not merely to undermine but to  reveal something about the way the world that is occluded by one's  current beliefs. However, one is not allowed to rest content with the new beliefs but is led to question their comprehensiveness and  adequacy precisely because they are suspected of occluding still  something else about the world (Wong, 2005).   However one might try to reconcile the tension between the skeptical  questioning and the claims to special knowledge, the stories about  skill activities such as Cook Ding's arguably exemplify certain kinds of activities that human beings across cultures and historical  periods have experienced to their great satisfaction. These  activities involve the mastery of the many sub-activities that  constitute a complex activity with goals that challenge abilities of  the agent. The activities of master musicians (e.g., the technique of fingering on a flute), artistic performers (e.g., the placement of  the toes in the pirouette of a dancer) and athletes (e.g., bringing  the bat through the optimal plane while swinging it to hit a  baseball) correspond rather closely to Cook Ding's mastery of the  sub-activities of cutting through the ox. In all these activities the agent does not need to pay conscious attention to performance of the  sub-activities, and this enables attention to be focused on matters  that escape the apprentice. Just as Cook Ding's skill in the motor  execution of the motions of cutting allows him to fully focus on  where the joints and spaces are, the flutist is able to concentrate  on the music as she is making it and not her fingering technique (see Csikszentmihalyi, 1990 for a study of such activities).   One interesting and realistic detail in the cook's story challenges  the reading of the skill stories as extolling the possibility of  nonconceptual access to the grain of things. The cook says that  whenever he comes to a complicated place in the ox, he sizes up the  difficulties, tell himself to watch out and be careful, keeps his  eyes on what he's doing, works very slowly, and moves the knife with  the greatest subtlety until the pieces fall away. Clearly there is  conceptualization going on here, and in fact it is implausible to  deny that the whole activity is being guided by a conceptualized  goal! There is a difference between self-conscious conceptualization  of experience and the application of concepts without awareness of  applying them. One mustn't confuse the latter with nonconceptualized  experience. While there may be some way of squaring this part of the  story with the interpretation that nonconceptual experience is  celebrated in the Zhuangzi, the virtue of the story is that  it is realistic and captures aspects of supremely skilled activities  that are part of the experience of many people. Insofar as the  Zhuangzi recommends such activities as part of a good life,  it very much presents an ethic.   It also presents an ethic in supporting the idea of inclusiveness and acceptance. Here skeptical questioning of what we think we know,  especially what we think we know about people and who is good and has something to offer to us are questioned in the chapter featuring  stigmatized individuals, often with feet amputated (a common criminal punishment of the time), who turn out to be masters drawing as many  students as Confucius. The Zhuangzi also urges  identification and acceptance of the whole and of any and all of the  changes that its creatures undergo. We should not be so sure that  life is great and death is evil, and accept everything that comes our way, marveling at the possibility that upon our death we might be  made into a fly's foreleg the next time around. The  Zhuangzi, like the Daodejing, calls upon human  beings to identify with the whole of the cosmos and its  transformations, and such identification involves acceptance, even  celebration of death and loss, because in dying one participates in  the next transformation of the cosmos and becomes something else to  marvel at, such as a fly's foreleg. Such a call may hold deep appeal, especially for those who cannot see any form of monotheism as a  viable object for belief and yet desire some sort of spiritual  connection that stretches beyond the merely human community.   However, such a call also raises challenging questions about human  possibility. Can human beings really accept the loss of their selves  and their loved ones with the kind of equanimity that identification  with the whole requires? The Zhuangzi presents stories that  represent different possibilities for conceiving of the nature of  this equanimity. In the stories of the four masters, death is  accepted without the slightest shiver. In the story of the death of  Zhuangzi's wife, a more complex emotional story is told, whereby  Zhuangzi first feels her loss but comes to accept it as yet another  transformation. This story suggests that one may retain one's  attachments to particular people and yet maintain resilience in the  face of their loss because of one's identification with the whole  (see Becker, 1998 for an discussion of resilience in the face of loss in the context of developing a contemporary Stoicism). But how is  such identification psychologically possible? In the  Zhuangzi, it seems based on a spirit of restless and joyful  exploration of the richness of the cosmos. In the end, it embodies  the emotion that is perhaps most fundamental to philosophy, and that  is wonder.   There is one more ethical implication of Daoism ethics that is more  of an implication that could be drawn by contemporary philosophers  than one that was drawn in the foundational texts. The  Zhuangzi's lampooning of human pretension and arrogance,  together with call to identify with the whole and with the nonhuman  parts of nature, has appealed to those seeking philosophical  perspectives within which to frame an environmental ethic (see  Girardot, Miller, and Liu, 2001). A Daoist perspective offers both an alternative to an instrumentalist approach that would ground an  environmental ethic solely in the idea that it defeats human beings'  interests to foul their own environment and to an intrinsic value  approach that would ground duties to nature solely in a value that it possesses apart from its relation to human beings. A Daoist approach  might point to the way that the human traits are conditioned by and  responses to the nonhuman environment, such that these traits cannot  be specified independently of the environment. In other words the  Daoist self is not a substantial independent existence but a  relational one whose boundaries extend into the conventionally  nonhuman, and from a Daoist perspective that is reconstructed to be  oriented toward the problem of the environment, we would do well to  acknowledge the ways in which whatever we value in ourselves is  connected to the nonhuman (Hourdequin and Wong, 2005). Treating the  environment correctly is not purely a matter of satisfying  conventional human interests such as conserving resources for our  future consumption, nor need it be a matter of recognizing a value  that the environment has in complete independence of its impact on  us. It can be a matter of recognizing that who we are cannot be  cleanly separated from the nonhuman environment. Moreover, there is  much to be gained from being open to the transformation of our  interests if we remain open to new sources of satisfaction in the  nonhuman environment that currently escape our conceptions of the  “useful” (recall Huizi and the gourds).   Legalism is perhaps best introduced as the opposite reaction to  Analects 2.3, in which Confucius says that guiding the  people by edicts and keeping them in line with punishments will keep  them out of trouble but will give them no sense of shame; guiding  them by virtue and keeping them in line with the rites will not only  give them a sense of shame but enable them to reform themselves. In  the most prominent Legalist text, the Hanfeizi (Hanfei lived during the 3rd century B.C.E.), the people are  characterized as far too swayed by their material interests to be  guided by a sense of shame. People must be guided by clear edicts and strong punishments. Furthermore, rulers must be wary of their  ambitious ministers and take care not to reveal their own likes and  dislikes so as not to be manipulated by their scheming subordinates.  As to rulers themselves, it is a mistake to found government on the  presumption that they are or can become virtuous. While exceptionally good and exceptionally evil rulers have existed, the vast majority of rulers have been mediocre. Governments must be structured so that it  can run satisfactorily, because that is what rulers will be like  almost always.   The Confucians held that the remedy to China's turmoil and chaos lay  in wise and morally excellent rulers—that moral excellence  would ripple downwards from the top and create harmony and  prosperity. The Daodejing upholds a vision of an original  harmony that human beings once had, a way that consisted in living in accord with the natural grain of things, and that involves seeking  only what one truly needs, not in multiplying useless desires that  only agitate and ultimately make us unhappy. The Legalists rejected  moral and spiritual transformation, of either the Confucian or Laoist kind, as the solution to China's troubles. Most human beings will  remain unlovely beings to the end, and governmental structures must  be designed for such beings. The sort of structure recommended is a  highly centralized government in which the ruler retains firm control of the “two handles” of government: punishment and favor  (chapter 7). By making sure he always has his own hands on these  handles, the ruler remains in firm control of his ministers. If a  minister proposes a way to get something done, measure his  performance on whether he gets it done in the way he says he will. If not, punish him. The ruler is to hold his officials strictly to the  definitions of their role responsibilities, so that they are punished not only when they fail to perform some of those assigned  responsibilities but also when they do more than their assigned  responsibilities.   Some of the most interesting parts of the text consist of arguments  supporting the necessity of governmental structure and the folly of  depending on the character of rulers. The “Five Vermin”  chapter (49) presents an important and provocative argument that  threatens to undermine the basis of virtue ethics. It is argued there that social harmony and prosperity is an achievement requiring  fortuitous circumstances. The chapter does not dispute an assumption  that is commonly held across Chinese philosophical schools—that the sage-kings of ancient times were virtuous and ruled over a  harmonious and prosperous society. It is disputed, however, that  their virtue was the primary cause of this golden age. What about  those kings in more recent times who were ren and  yi, benevolent and righteous, and who got wiped out for  their trouble? Virtue is not the explanation of success or failure.  The explanation has much more to do with the scarcity of goods in  relation to the number of people. This argument has in fact been  repeated in contemporary analytic moral philosophy by philosophers  drawing from “situationist” psychology, which highlights  the importance of situations rather than “global”  character traits in causing behavior. Global traits involve  dispositions to behave in certain ways regardless of the situation or at least across a wide range of situations. One of the most striking  experiments marshaled in favor of situationism was conducted in a  theological seminary, where students were set up to encounter a  person slumped in an alleyway. The experiment was to see what factors influenced a student's decision whether to stop and offer aid. It was found that by far the most influential variable was whether students  were in a hurry for the next appointment, rather than the nature of  students' commitments to religion or the nature of the tasks in which they were engaged at the time, even if the task was preparing a  sermon on the Good Samaritan (Darley and Batson, 1973)! Philosophers  Gilbert Harman (1998–99, 1999–2000) and John Doris (2000) have used studies like this to argue that global character traits are a myth and that the type of situation has much more to do with how  people behave than any supposed character or personality they  possess. Hanfeizi, then was the first situationist. The way that  Hanfeizi's situationism threatens Confucian virtue ethics is that it  disputes the possibility of the junzi, noblepersons who  possess firm and stable excellent characters.   Confucians can give replies to such arguments. The most obvious reply is that they never promised virtue would be easy. Indeed, the  canonical texts all stress the difficulty of achieving full virtue.  Mencius in particular conceives of moral development as extending the natural beginnings of virtue to situations where they ought to extend but do not currently extend. The experiments in psychology marshaled  in favor of situationism, moreover, typically do point to a minority  of subjects who show a more desirable consistency of behavior in the  experimental situation. Confucians might also object that good  results will follow from the kind of structure described in the  Hanfeizi only if persons of good-enough character staff it.  The Hanfeizi sometimes implicitly acknowledges this point  and integrates it with a reasonable stress on structure and  impersonal administration. In chapter 6 there is discussion of what  is necessary to compensate for a mediocre ruler: getting able people  with the right motives to serve that ruler. Institute laws and  regulations specifying how these people are selected: not on the  basis of reputation alone, since that will give people an incentive  to curry favor with their associates and subordinates and disregard  the ruler; not on the basis of cliques, since that will motivate  people only to establish connections rather than acquire the  qualifications to perform in office. Specify the qualifications  clearly in laws and regulations, appoint, promote, and dismiss  strictly according to these specifications. The law, not the ruler's  personal views, must form the basis for these actions. In chapter 43, consideration is given to the suggestion that those who take heads in battle should be rewarded with desirable offices. This is rejected in cases where the office requires wisdom and ability rather than  courage. In the end, one wonders whether a good number of such  persons of right motive, competence, courage, wisdom and ability are  enough, given the highly centralized nature of the government  recommended in the Hanfeizi. A lot depends on the ruler who  wields the “two handles” of government. Taken in moderate doses, Hanfeizi arguably provides a needed corrective to the Confucian emphasis on character. Structure can be designed with an  eye to the realistic possibilities for mediocre and bad rulers. The  Confucian emphasis on discretion in judgment is obviously subject to  abuse that can be checked by structures that provide a degree of  impersonal administration and consistent application of relatively  clear laws and regulations. The American legal experience seems to  show, however, that no set of laws can interpret itself with an eye  to complex situations that are unforeseeable when laws are framed.  Ultimately, stable character and wise discretion are needed.   The strongest challenge that Legalism raises to virtue ethics is not  that stable virtues are impossible to achieve, but that they are not  realistic possibilities for most persons, and that therefore lofty  virtue ideals cannot provide the basis for a large-scale social  ethic. Even if these ideals are directed only at an elite that is  then expected to lead the rest of the people, the question arises as  to what influence this elite can have on the rest if the majority do  not have some attraction to virtue. It is dubious, however, that the  solution lies in seeking to make character irrelevant.   Buddhism is not indigenous to China, and it has a long and rich  tradition of thought and practice in India and in areas other than  China. This brief section will focus on ethical aspects of the most  distinctive form of Buddhism that developed once it was introduced to China: Chan Buddhism, or as it came to be known later in Japan, Zen.  It should be noted, however, that prominent forms of Chinese Buddhism also include Tiantai and Huayan. All three forms of Chinese Buddhism  developed in interaction with indigenous Chinese thought, especially  Daoism. Chan developed partly as a response to the perception of some Chinese Buddhists that Tiantai and Huayan had developed in overly  scholastic directions with proliferating metaphysical distinctions  and doctrines that hinder rather than aid Enlightenment.   The immediate focus of Buddhist ethics is the problem of suffering,  and a conception of the self is at the heart of the Buddhist response to that problem. The self is conceived as a floating collection of  various psychophysical reactions and responses with no fixed center  or unchanging ego entity. The usual human conception of self as a  fixed and unchanging center is a delusion. Our bodily attributes,  various feelings, perceptions, ideas, wishes, dreams, and in general  a consciousness of the world display a constant interplay and  interconnection that leads us to the belief that there is some  definite ‘I’ that underlies and is independent of the  ever-shifting series. But there is only the interacting and  interconnected series. Human suffering ultimately stems from a  concern for the existence and pleasures and pains of the kind of self that never existed in the first place. Recognition of the  impermanence of the self can lead to release or mitigation of  suffering, but the recognition cannot merely be intellectual. It must involve transformation of one's desires. The belief on some abstract  level, for example, that there are no permanent selves is a belief  that can co-exist with having and acting on intense desires to avoid  death, as if death were some evil befalling some underlying  ‘I’. Similarly, the intellectual recognition that none of the “things” of ordinary life are fixed and separate  entities, anymore than the self is, can lead to recognition of all of life as an interdependent whole and to the practical attitude of  compassion for all of life. But if the latter recognition is again  merely intellectual, one can still have and act on intensely  self-regarding desires at severe cost to others. In both cases a  transformation of desire is what is required in order to go beyond  the merely intellectual and to achieve true Enlightenment and  meaningful recognition of one's true nature as impermanent and as  interdependent with all other things.   Recall the practical focus and the closeness to pre-theoretical  experience that are distinctive of indigenous Chinese philosophy.  These traits interacted with Buddhism as it was introduced into  China. The ‘Chan’ in “Chan Buddhism” comes  from the Sanskrit ‘dhyana’ which means  meditation. Though meditation practice is not the only practice  employed in Chan, its central role does illustrate the focus on  achieving transformation of one's desires through experience of the  self and the world. This kind of transformation is different than  reaching intellectual conviction through textual study and  understanding of argumentation, and also different than escape from  the world of suffering through obliteration of one's consciousness as an individual being. Chinese Buddhism in the form of Chan was  especially influential in putting forward this conception of  Enlightenment as lived in this world rather than escape from it.   Daoism in particular has themes that make it especially appropriate  for interaction with Buddhism. Recall the theme that one must keep  desires from interfering with one's attention to the matter at hand.  Correspondingly, a major theme in Chan is that all forms of striving, especially the very striving for Enlightenment, interfere with  attention to one's true nature (Hui Neng, 638–713, Platform Scripture). Hence the reason for the otherwise puzzlingly harsh  reactions of Chan masters to the earnest strivings of their students  to reach Enlightenment (Yi Xuan, d. 866, The Recorded  Conversations of Linji Yi Xuan) especially if such strivings  have any tinge of the academic or doctrinal about them (Huang Po, d.  850, The Transmission of Mind). Recall also the theme in  Daodejing concerning the dao as the source of the  myriad things. The Buddha's insight into the nature of the many  things brought him to recognize the Many as also the One. Finally,  recall the skeptical theme in Daoism about the limits of  conceptualization. The Buddha's insight into the Many as also the One does not mean that the Many are really only One, but rather Many and  Once at once, and if we have difficulty making sense of that, it is  founded in the limits of our conceptualization. Finally, there is the same possibility for ambiguity as to whether there is some ineffable  and nonconceptual access to an ultimate reality or whether there is  skeptical question that goes all the way down (or all the way up?).  In the Zhuangzi this ambiguity is quite apparent. And though Chan is usually taken to affirm a foundation in ineffable access  (Kasulis, 1986), there are those who argue that a thoroughgoing  skepticism is truer to its spirit (Wright, 1998).   Since the self is a bundle of changing psychological and physical  attributes whose boundaries are conventionally established, and since its attributes exist only in relation to other things outside its  conventionally established boundaries, it ought to dampen attachment  its self-regarding cares and concerns and widen the boundaries of its concerns to embrace all life. This Buddhist reasoning certainly is an interesting way to ground impersonal concern, and it may appeal to  those of us who see little plausibility in the idea of Cartesian  substances as fixed ego entities. On the other hand, this reasoning  may seem to drain all passion from life, and it requires that we  dampen the attachment we have not only to our selves but also to  particular others such as friends and family members. Buddhism is  especially well known for its advocacy of detachment, not only from  material possessions, worldly power and status, but also from  particular people and communities. For example, in Ashvaghosha's poem on “Nanda the Fair,” the Buddha explains to Nanda that  delusion alone ties one person to another (Conze, 1959, 110). The  argument is that a family is like a group of travelers at an inn who  come together for a while and then part. No one belongs to anyone  else. A family is held together only as sand is held in a clenched  fist. Issues as to the desirability and realistic possibility of such a detached attitude arise here, and not surprisingly, the issues are  similar to ones raised by Daoist identification with the cosmos. As  the discussion of Zhuangzi and wife made clear, it may be possible to distinguish as an alternative to the pure and complete detachment  exemplified in Ashvagosha another kind that is consistent with  emotional involvement with others for as long as they are given to  us.  Chinese Philosophy: Mohism |  Chinese Philosophy: Mohist Canons |  comparative philosophy: Chinese and Western |  Confucius |  Daoism |  Laozi |  Mencius |  Xunzi |  Zhuangzi   Copyright © 2013 by   David Wong <dbwong@duke.edu>      View this site from another server:  The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy is copyright © 2016 by The Metaphysics Research Lab, Center for the Study of Language and Information (CSLI), Stanford University Library of Congress Catalog Data: ISSN 1095-5054